--- PAGE 1 ---
[No text extracted - possibly scanned/image]

--- PAGE 2 ---
 IRC:22-2015
Standard  SpecificationS   
and  code  of practice  for   
road  BridgeS
Section  Vi 
compoSite conStruction 
(Limit StateS deSign)
(Third Revision)
Published by:
indian roadS congreSS
Kama Koti Marg, 
Sector-6, R.K. Puram, 
New Delhi-110 022
January, 2015
Price : ` 800/-
(Plus Packing & Postage)

--- PAGE 3 ---
IRC:22-2015 
First Published : October, 1996
Reprinted   : March, 1971
Reprinted
   : February , 1974
Reprinted   : November , 1977 (Incorporates Amendment    
    No. 1, February, 1977)
First Revision
 : October , 1986
Reprinted   : March, 1991 (Incorporates Amendment     
    No. 1, March, 1991)
Reprinted   : September , 1998
Reprinted   : July , 2001
Reprinted   : November , 2002  
    (Incorporates Amendment  No. 2, November, 2002)
Reprinted   : October , 2005  
    (Incorporates Amendment  No. 3, January, 2003)
Second Revision : September , 2008
Reprinted   : October , 2009
Third Revision : January , 2015
(All Rights Reserved. No part of this publication shall be reproduced, 
translated or transmitted in any form or by any means without the 
permission of the Indian Roads Congress)
Printed by India Offset Press, Delhi
1000 Copies

--- PAGE 4 ---
 IRC:22-2015
contentS
S. no. description page no.
	 Personnel	of	the	Bridges	Specifications	and	Standards	Committee	 i	-	ii
 Introduction  1
600 General   2
601 Limit State Method of Design 9
602
 Material  10
603 Design for Ultimate Limit State 10
604
 Design for Serviceability Limit 22
605
 Design for Fatigue Limit 25
606
 Shear Connector  36
607 Composite Columns 47
608
 Filler Beam Decks for Bridges 60
609
 Precast Slab on Steel Beams 63
610
 Construction & Erection 66
61
1 Testing Method   67
612 Fire Resistance  68
613 Maintenance  68
Annexure-I Moment of Resistances  69
Annexure-II
 Location of Plastic Neutral Axis in Composite Column  78
Annexure-III Materials and Properties 81

--- PAGE 5 ---
[No text extracted - possibly scanned/image]

--- PAGE 6 ---
i IRC:22-2015
perSonneL of tHe BridgeS SpecificationS  
and StandardS committee 
(as on 8th august, 2014)
1. Das, S.N. Director General (Road Development), Ministry of Road 
 (Convenor) T ransport & Highways, New Delhi
2. Tawade, D.O.  Addl. Director General, Ministry of Road 
      (Co-Convenor)  T ransport & Highways, New Delhi
3. Chief Engineer (B) S&R  Ministry of Road Transport & Highways, New Delhi 
 (Member-Secretary) 
Members
4.
Agrawal, K.N. DG(W), CPWD (Retd.) Ghaziabad 
5. Alimchandani, C.R. Chairman & Managing Director, STUP Consultants (P) 
Ltd., Mumbai
6. Arora, H.C. Chief Engineer (Retd.), MORT&H, New Delhi 
7. Bagish, Dr. B.P. C-2/2013, Vasant Kunj, Opp. D.P.S., New Delhi
8. Bandyopadhyay, Dr. N. Director, Stup Consultants (P) Ltd., New Delhi 
9. Bandyopadhyay, Dr. T.K. Joint Director General (Retd.) INSDAG, Kolkata 
10. Banerjee, A.K. Chief Engineer (Retd.) MoRT&H, New Delhi
11. Banerjee, T.B. Chief Engineer (Retd.) MoRT&H, New Delhi
12. Basa, Ashok Director (Tech.) B. Engineers & Builders Ltd., Bhubaneswar
13. Bhasin, P.C. ADG (B), (Retd.), MoRT&H, New Delhi
14. Bhowmick, Alok Managing Director, Bridge & Structural Engg. Consultants (P) Ltd., Noida 
15. Bongirwar, P.L. Advisor, L&T, Mumbai 
16. Dhodapkar, A.N. Chief Engineer (Retd.) MoRT&H, New Delhi
17. Ghoshal, A. Director and Vice President, STUP Consultants (P) Ltd., Kolkata
18. Joglekar, S.G. Vice President, STUP Consultants (P) Ltd. , Mumbai
19. Kand,, C.V. Chief Engineer (Retd.), MP, PWD Bhopal
20. Koshi, Ninan DG(RD) & Addl. Secy., (Retd) MOST, New Delhi 
21. Kumar, Ashok Chief Engineer (Retd.), MoRT&H, New Delhi
22. Kumar, Prafulla DG (RD) & AS, MoRT&H (Retd.), New Delhi 
23. Kumar, Vijay E-in-Chief (Retd.) UP, PWD, 
24. Manjure, P.Y. Director, Freyssinet Prestressed Concrete Co. Mumbai 

--- PAGE 7 ---
iiIRC:22-2015 
25. Mukherjee, M.K. Chief Engineer (Retd.) MoRT&H, New Delhi
26. Nagpal, A.K. Prof. IIT, New Delhi 
27. Narain, A.D. DG (RD) & AS, MoRT&H (Retd.), New Delhi 
28. Ninan, R.S. Chief Engineer (Retd.) MoRT&H, New Delhi 
29. Pandey, R.K. Chief Engineer (Planning), MoRT&H, New Delhi 
30. Parameswaran,  
Dr. (Mrs.) LakshmyChief Scientist (BAS), CRRI, New Delhi 
31. Raizada, Pratap S. Vice President (Corporate Affairs). Gammon India Ltd., 
Mumbai 
32. Rao, Dr. M.V.B. A-181, Sarita Vihar, New Delh
33. Roy, Dr. B.C. Senior Executive Director, M/s. Consulting Engg. Services India (Pvt.) Ltd., Gurgaon 
34. Saha, Dr. G.P. Executive Director Construma Consultancy (P) Ltd., Mumbai
35. Sharan, G. DG (RD) & Spl. Secy (Retd.) MoRT&H, New Dellhi 
36. Sharma, R.S. Chief Engineer (Retd.) MoRT&H, New Delhi
37. Sinha, N.K. DG(RD) & SS, (Retd.) MoRT&H, New Delhi 
38. Subbarao, Dr. Harshavardhan Chairman & Managing Director, Construma Consultancy 
(P) Ltd. Mumbai
39. Tandon, Mahesh Prof. Managing Director, Tandon Consultants (P) Ltd.,  New Delhi 
40. Thandavan, K.B. Chief Engineer (Retd.) MoRT&H, New Delhi 
41. Velayutham, V. DG (RD) & SS (Retd.) MoRT&H, New Delhi 
42. Viswanathan, T. 7046, Sector B, Pocket 10, Vasant Kunj, New Delhi
43. The Executive Director (B&S) RDSO, Lucknow
44. The Director and Head, (Civil Engg.), Bureau of Indian Standards, New Delhi
Corresponding Members
1. Raina, Dr. V.K. Consultant (World Bank)
2. Singh, R.B. Director, Projects Consulting India (P) Ltd. New Delhi
Ex-Officio Members
1. President,  (Sunil Bhowmik), Engineer-in-Chief,
  
 Indian Roads Congress PWD (R&B), Govt. of Tripura
2. Honorary T reasurer, (S.N. Das), Director General (Road Development), 
 Indian Roads Congress Ministry of Road Transport & Highways
3. Secretary General,  
 Indian Roads Congress

--- PAGE 8 ---
1 IRC:22-2015
Standard  Specification  and  code  of practice  for  road  
BridgeS  Section  Vi : compoSite conStruction   
(Limit StateS deSign)
introduction
The	first	Bridge 	Code	in	Limit	State	Philosophy	 published	 by	IRC	in	2008	formatted	 as	a	
“Stand alone” document with minimum reference to other bridge codes.  IRC:24, the basic 
code for Steel Road Bridges in limit state philosophy was prepared in line with BIS publication IS:800-2007 (General Construction in Steel Limit State Method) was published in 2010.   IRC:24 was extensively revised in January 2014.  IRC:112, Code for Concrete Road Bridges,  in Limit State Method was published in 2011.  IRC Technical Committee for Steel and Composite Structures (B-5) felt the need for a through revision of IRC:22 to make it compatible with the revised version of IRC:24 for Steel Road Bridges and IRC:112 for Concrete Road Bridges.  The present revised version is a result of such an endeavour.
The personnel of the Steel and Composite Structures Committee (B-5) is given below:
 Ghoshal,  A.
   Convenor
 Basa, Ashok   Co-Convenor
 Ghosh, U.K.   Member Secretary
Members
 Bagish, Dr . B.P .  Mohanty, G.R.
 Banerjee, T .B.  Parameswaran Dr. (Mrs.) Lakshmy
 Baul, Saibal   Purakayastha, D.
 Bhattacharya, A.K.   Roy, Dr. B.C.
 Bhattacharya, D   Singh, A.
 Chopra, A.K.   Singhal, U.
 Ghosh, Prof. Achyut   Sood, V.B.
 Guha, Arijit   Subbarao, Dr. H.
 Kalyanaraman, Dr . V .  Tandon, Prof. Mahesh
 Kumar , Sudhanshu   Venkatram, P.G.
   Vijay , Late P.B.
Corresponding Members
 Bhowmick, A.   Singh, R.B.
Ex-officio Members
 President,   (Bhowmik, Sunil), Engineer-in-Chief,  
 Indian Roads Congress  PWD (R&B), Govt. of Tripura
 Honorary T reasurer,  (Das, S.N.), Director General  
 Indian Roads Congress  (Road Development), Ministry of Road  
   Transport and Highways
 Secretary General, 
 Indian Roads Congress

--- PAGE 9 ---
2IRC:22-2015 
The	B-5	Committee	 finally	approved	 the	draft	document	 in	its	meeting	held	on	12.4.2014	 for	
placing	before	the 	BSS	Committee.		 The	Bridges	Specifications	 and	Standards	 Committee	
(BSS) approved the draft document in its meeting held on 8th August 2014.  The Executive 
Committee in its meeting held on 18th August 2014, approved the same document for placing 
it before the Council.  The IRC Council in its 203rd meeting held at New Delhi on 19th and  
20th	August		2014,	approved	 the	draft	revision	of	IRC:22-2014	 “Standard	 Specifications	 and	
Code of Practice for Road Bridges” Section VI Composite Construction (Limit States Design) 
for publishing.
600  generaL
600.1 Scope
This code is applicable to simply supported as well as continuous bridges and supporting column systems, with Steel-Concrete Composite Construction. The code is based on Limit States Method of Design.
600.2 t ype
This code is restricted to steel-concrete composite construction where steel girders are 
used as primary members and cast-in-situ reinforced concrete and/or pre-cast concrete slab with necessary in-situ concrete as deck slab. Wherever appropriate, the provisions of this code may be applied to steel-concrete composite elements/components of other types of bridges.
600.3 t erminology
accidental Load: The load not normally expected in design life but has major impact if it ever 
occurs, such as ramming of a ship or barge against piers or accidents caused by ramming of vehicles on Bridge Piers of Wall Type, columns or the frames built in the median or in the vicinity of the carriageway supporting the superstructure.
composite action:
  Integral action of primary supporting steel member and supported 
concrete deck, with or without limited slip at their interface, to ensure greater strength and 
rigidity. In composite columns, it is the integrated action between steel and its encasement or in	fill	concrete.
 	Shear	transfer	is	to	be	ensured	through	use	of	mechanical	 devices	known	as	
shear connectors in composite beams.
design Loads: The applied loads multiplied by the load factors.design Service Life: The time period during which the structure or its components should 
satisfy the design objectives and functions.
detail category:
  Designation given to a particular detail to indicate the S-N curve to be used 
in fatigue assessment.differential Shrinkages: It is entirely due to shrinkage of concrete from the time composite 
action	comes	into
 	effect.	When	the	coefficient	 of	thermal	expansion	 varies	significantly	
between steel and concrete (concrete with limestone or granite aggregate), it also includes the difference in thermal strain between the steel and concrete. Differential shrinkage may lead to increase in stresses and is more pronounced in continuous girders.
fatigue:	Damage	caused
 	by	repeated	fluctuations	 of	stress,	leading	to	progressive	 cracking	
of a structural element.

--- PAGE 10 ---
3 IRC:22-2015
fatigue Limit State: The state of failure through fatigue damage due to repeated application 
of loads.
fatigue Strength: Stress range that can be endured by a category of detail, depending upon 
the number of cycles.
flexible Shear connectors:  Consists of studs, channels etc. welded as in fig. 1  to steel 
member to develop integral action and deriving resistance to shear through the bending of 
connectors,	without	permitting	the	slab	to	lift	from	girder	flange	through	anchorage	action.
Fig. 1  Typical Flexible Shear Connectors
Hybrid Section:	 A	fabricated	 steel 	section	with	a	web	that	has	a	specified	minimum	 yield	
strength	lower	than	that	of	one	or	both	flanges.
initial dead Load:  The combination of weight of steel structure and the portion of concrete 
deck that are supported by the steel structure alone before the development of full composite 
action with concrete reaching 75 percent of its 28 days strength.
Limit State: The load state beyond which the structure is incapable of performing its desired 
function.
Loads: Applied forces as mentioned in IRC:6-2014 that the structure is subjected during its 
life time.
Load factors:  The factors multiplied with the loads or their combinations to obtain design 
loads, while checking performance under various limit states.

--- PAGE 11 ---
4IRC:22-2015 
rigid Shear connectors: Consist of bars, angles, channels, tees welded to steel member 
to develop composite action, as in fig. 2, deriving their resistance to shear from concrete 
bearing on the vertical face. They exhibit negligible deformation under shear transfer. These 
are not recommended for adoption.
Fig. 2  Typical Rigid Shear Connectors 
(Ls Indicates Lane of Shear (Type)
Service Limit:  The loading state beyond which the structure or its components becomes 
incapable	 of	performing 	its	intended	function;	due	to	excessive	 deformation	 or	deflection	 or	
vibration.
Serviceability Loads: The actual loads on the structure against which the serviceability of 
the structure has to be checked.
Shear connectors:  These are the mechanical attachments to steel members to transfer 
interface shear to develop composite action and are composed of various types, viz. rigid 
shear	connectors,	flexible	shear	connectors	etc.
S-n curve:	Curve,	defining 	the	relationship	 between	the	numbers	of	stress	cycles	to	failure	
(Nsc) at a constant stress range (Sc), during fatigue loading on parts of a structure.
Strength factors:	The	factors 	that	divide	the	specified	strength	to	obtain	design	strength;	
while assessing the safety under limit states of strength.Stress range:
  Algebraic difference between two extremes of stresses in a cycle of loading 
at a location in a member.Superimposed dead 
 Load: The dead loads added subsequent to concrete hardening of 
deck slab that are resisted by composite action.

--- PAGE 12 ---
5 IRC:22-2015
transient Load:  The loads that are assumed to be varying over a short time interval like 
vehicular live load with dynamic effect, pedestrian load, braking and tractive forces, temperature 
effects, wind loads on structure and vehicles, earthquake loads, vehicular centrifugal forces, accident loads such as vehicular collision loads, etc.
ultimate Limit State:  The state at which the structure fails and loses its integrity leading to 
its collapse.
600.4 Symbols
The symbols, other than those used for load categorization as per clause 601 .3, are as 
follows:
A Area
A
s Area of structural steel cross section
Asl Area of structural steel cross section in tension
Ac Gross area of concrete
Aec Area of concrete effective in compression
Ast Area of steel reinforcements
Af	 Area	of	each	flange	of	steel	section
Ae Effective cross sectional area
Aν Shear area
B Centre-to-centre distance between girders and is equal to transverse span of inner 
girder
b Outstand/width of the plate elements
be	 Effective	width	of	flange	between	pair	 of	bolts
beff	 Effective	width	of	concrete	flange
bf	 Width	of	the	structural	steel	flange
D Overall depth of girder/diameter of the  steel cross section
d
 Depth of web, Nominal diameter of bo lts/rivets/studs
d2	 Twice	 the	clear	distance	from	the	compression	 flange	of	angles,	plates	or	tongue	
plates to the neutral axis
dc vertical distance between centroid of concrete slab and centroid of steel beam
ds Overall depth of concrete slab
do Nominal diameter of the pipe column or the dimensions of the column in the 
direction of depth of the base plate
E, Es Modulus of elasticity of structural steel
Ecm Secant Modulus of elasticity of concrete
Est Modulus of elasticity of reinforcements

--- PAGE 13 ---
6IRC:22-2015 
Fw Design capacity of the web in bearing
f Actual normal stress range for the det ail category
fc Actual axial compressive stress in concrete at service load
fck Characteristic compressive cube strength of concrete at 28 days
fctk Characteristic axial tensile strength of concrete
ff Fatigue stress range corresponding to 5 × 106 cycles of loading
ffd Design fatigue normal stress range
ffeq Equivalent constant amplitude stress
ff max Highest normal stress range
ffn Normal fatigue stress range
ft Tensile strength of reinforcements
fo Proof stress
fyk Characteristic yield strength of reinforcement
fu Characteristic ultimate tensile stress
fup Characteristic ultimate tensile stress of the connected plate
fy Characteristic yield stress of steel
fyp Characteristic yield stress of connected plate
fyw Characteristic yield stress of the web material
h Depth of the section
hy	 Distance	between	shear	centre	of	the	 two	flanges	of	the	cross-section
I Moment of inertia of the member about an axis perpendicular to the plane of the 
frame
Ic Moment of inertia of concrete (assumed uncracked) about axis of bending for 
column
Ico Moment of inertia of composite section
Ifc	 Moment	 of	Inertia	of	the	compression	 flange	about	the	minor	axis	of	the	steel	
beam
Ift	 Moment	of	Inertia	of	the	tension	flange 	about	the	minor	axis	of	the	steel	beam
Is Moment of inertia of steel section about axis of bending for column
Ist Moment of inertia of reinforcement about axis of bending for column
Ix Moment of inertia about the major axis
KL Effective length of the member
KL/r Appropriate ef fective slenderness ratio  of the section
KL/ry Effective slenderness ratio of the section about the minor axis

--- PAGE 14 ---
7 IRC:22-2015
KL/rx Effective slenderness ratio of the section about the major axis
L Actual span of girder
LC Effective span of cantilever for overhang
Lo	 Length	between	points	of	zero	moment	(inflection)	in	the	span
L1 End span of continuous girder
L2 Interior span of continuous girder
L3 End span of continuous girder adjacent to cantilever span/overhang
L4 Length of overhang or cantilever span
M Bending moment
Mv Reduced bending moment due to effect of shear force
Mcr Elastic critical moment corresponding to lateral torsional buckling
Me Elastic moment capacity of the section
Mf	 Design	plastic	resistance	of	the	flange 	alone	for	steel	section
Mp Plastic moment capacity of the section
Mu Design bending strength
My Factored applied moments about the minor axis of the cross-section
Mx Factored applied moments about the major axis of the cross-section
m Modular ratio
mdl Modular ratio (long term)
mll Modular ratio (short term)
NSC Number of stress cycles
P Design axial force
Pcr Elastic buckling load
Pp	 Plastic	 resistance	 of	encased	steel	column	section	or	concrete	filled	rectangular	 or	
square column section
q Shear stress at service load
Rh Flange stress reduction factor for hybrid section
r Appropriate radius of gyration
ry Radius of gyration about the minor axis
rx Radius of gyration about the major axis
S Spacing
Sl	 Spacing	of	shear	connectors	for	longitudinal	shear	due	to	flexural	force
Sr Spacing of shear connectors due to bending moment
t Thickness of element/angle, time in m inutes

--- PAGE 15 ---
8IRC:22-2015 
tf	 Thickness	of	flange	of	steel	section
tp Thickness of plate
tw Thickness of web of steel section,
V, Vν,VL Factored applied shear force
Vd, Design shear strength
Vp Plastic shear resistance under pure shear
W Total load
X
 Distance from centre-line of edge gird er to edge of slab
xe Depth of elastic neutral axis of composite section from centroid of steel section
xu	 Depth	of	neutral	axis	at	limit	state	of	flexure	from	top	of	concrete
Ze Elastic section modulus
Zp Plastic section modulus
Zpc, Zpcn Plastic section modulus of concrete about its own centroid and about the neutral 
axis of the composite section respectively
Zpr, Zprn Plastic section modulus of reinforcement about its own centroid and about the neutral axis of the composite section respectively
Z
ps, Zpsn Plastic section modulus of structural steel section about its own centroid and about the neutral axis of the composite section respectively
y
g Distance between point of application of the load and shear centre of the cross-section
α Imperfection factor
α
c	 Strength	coefficient	of	concrete
δ Steel distribution ratio
χ Stress reduction factor due to buckling  under compression
χm Stress reduction factor,χ, at fym
χLT Stress reduction factor for lateral torsion buckling of a beam
γ Unit weight of steel
γc Partial safety factor for material (concrete)
γf Partial safety factor for load
γm Partial safety factor for material (structural steel)
γm0 Partial safety factor against yield stress and buckling (structural steel)
γm1 Partial safety factor against ultimate stress (structural steel)
γfft Partial safety factor for fatigue load
γmft Partial safety factor for fatigue strength
γmv Partial safety factor against shear failure

--- PAGE 16 ---
9 IRC:22-2015
γmw Partial safety factor for strength of weld
γs Partial safety factor for material (reinforcements)
ε Yield stress ratio, (250/fy)1/2
λ, λr Non dimensional slenderness ratio
 = fK Lr Ef fP Pyy cc yc c // // () ==2 2π
λe Equivalent slenderness ratio
µ Poisson’ s ratio
µc Correction factor
η1, η2	 Coefficients
η10, η20	 Coefficients
τ Actual shear stress range for the deta il category
τf Fatigue shear stress range
τfd Design fatigue shear stress range
τfmax Highest shear stress range
τfn Fatigue shear stress range at NSC cycle for the detail category
601  Limit  State  metHod  of  deSign
601.1 general
Normal elastic method is valid for analysis of the structure after considering load history, 
sequence of concrete casting and development of composite strength. In case of propped construction, most of the initial dead load is resisted through girder-prop system and the main girder remains basically unstressed at that stage. In case of un-propped construction the steel girders alone has to carry the initial dead load and is consequently stressed. The necessary distinction has to be made in the analysis. In ultimate limit state, however, this distinction is	not	necessary
 	while	checking	for	flexural	strength.	For	design	of	steel	components	 and	
concrete deck, stipulations of IRC:24-2010, IRC:112-2011 and this code may be applied.
601.2 Limit States
Structural safety has to be assessed for each of the limit states as mentioned below:
601.2.1 Serviceability Limit State
Is the state at which any of the following conditions occur
 i) Stress in structural steel has reached the prescribed limit
	
ii)	 Deflection	reaches	the	prescribed	limit
 iii) Concrete crack width reaches the prescribed limit

--- PAGE 17 ---
10IRC:22-2015 
 iv) Slip at the interface between steel and concrete exceeds permissible limits
 v) V ibration becomes excessive specially at overhanging foot or cycle paths
601.2.2 Fatigue Limit State
Is the state at which stress range due to application of live loads, reach prescribed limit, 
corresponding	to	the	number	of	load	cycles	and	detail	configuration.
601.2.3 Ultimate Limit State
Is the state when under the worst combination of factored loads the structure or its components 
either reach design strength and collapse or becomes unstable. Both stability and strength need to be checked under Ultimate Limit State.
601.3 design actions and their 
 combinations
For Load Combinations and Load factors IRC:6-2014 shall be referred to.601.4 material Strength & partial Safety factor for material (γ
m)
Partial safety factors for materials as mentioned below in table 1 are to be used for  
assessment of strength:
table 1  material Safety factors (γm,)
partial Safety factor γm
ultimate Limit Serviceability Limit
Structural Steel against Yield Stress 1.10 1.00
Structural Steel against Ultimate stress 1.25 1.00
Steel Reinforcement ( γs) against Yield Stress 1.15 1.00
Shear Connectors against Yield Stress 1.25 1.00
Bolts & Rivets for Shop & Site Fabrication against Yield Stress 1.25 1.00
Welds for Shop Fabrication 1.25 1.00
Welds for Site Fabrication 1.50 1.00
Concrete (γc) For Basic and Seismic Combinations 1.50 1.00
Concrete (γc ) For Accidental Combinations 1.20 1.00
Note: Partial safety factors are not only given for fy and fck but also for fu
602  materiaL
The Materials and their properties are given in annexure-iii.
603  deSign  for  uL tima te   Limit  State
A typical composite girder system is as shown in fig.3 below. The neutral axis may be 
in	the	concrete 	slab,	or	in	top	flange	of	steel	section	or	in	the	web	of	the	steel	sections.	  
[Note: reference to annexure–i is given in clause 603.3.1 , where it is more appropriate].

--- PAGE 18 ---
11 IRC:22-2015
Fig.3  Typical Composite Girder
603.1 general
Distribution of moments and shears due to application of factored loads may be analyzed by 
elastic theory assuming concrete to be un-cracked and unreinforced.
Negative moments over internal supports as calculated above should be checked against 
section strength assuming steel girder acting integrally with concrete (considering un-cracked and	un-reinforced). 	If
 	the	flexural	tensile	stress	in	concrete	thus	calculated	 exceeds	the	tensile	
strength of concrete, fctk,0.05 as given in t able 6.5 of IRC:112-2011 then,
 i) a new analysis neglecting concrete (but including reinforcements) over 15 
percent of span on either side of supports should be done to check the strength,
 ii) provided 
 adjacent spans do not differ appreciably, positive maximum 
moments in the adjacent spans should be increased by 40 fct/fck percent for 
checking of strength without decreasing support moment (fct = tensile stress 
in	uncracked	 concrete 	flange).	This	provision	gives	partial	recognition	 to	the	
philosophy of plastic design.
Bottom	flange	of 	girder	in	negative	moment	zone	should	be	adequately	 braced	against	lateral	
buckling.
603.1.1 Sectional Classification of Girder
The section strength at ultimate limit state should be considered on their ability to resist 
local buckling before full plastic strength is developed. In this respect the sections may be classified	as
class – 1 or plastic: Cross-sections which can develop plastic hinges and 
have the rotation capacity required for failure of the structure by formation of a plastic mechanism.
class – 2 or compact: Cross-sections which can develop plastic moment of resistance but have inadequate plastic hinge rotation capacity for formation of a plastic mechanism due to local buckling.

--- PAGE 19 ---
12IRC:22-2015 
class – 3 or Semi-compact: Cross	-sections	in 	which	the	extreme	fibers	in	compression	
can reach yield stress, but cannot develop the plastic 
moment of resistance due to local buckling.
class – 4 or Slender: Cross-sections in which the elements buckle locally, even before reaching yield stress. This code does not deal with these types of section.
603.1.2 General Rules for Sectional Classification of Composite-Section
	 1.	 A 	composite 	section
 	should	be	classified	 according	 to	the	least	favourable	
class of steel elements in compression. The class of a composite section 
normally depends on the direction of the bending moment at that section.
 2. A  steel compression element restrained by its connection to a reinforced 
concrete element may be placed in a more favourable class, after ensuring its improved performance due to the above connection.
	 3.	 Plastic	 stress	distribution
 	should	be	used	for	section	classification	 except	at	
the boundary between Class 2 and 3 where the elastic stress distribution should be used taking into account sequence of construction and the effects of creep and shrinkage.
	 4.	 For	 classification, 	design
 	values	of	strength	of	materials	 should	be	taken.	
Concrete in tension should be neglected. The stress distribution should be established for the gross Cross-Section of the steel web and the effective flanges.
 5. W
 elded mesh should not be included in the effective section unless it has 
sufficient	ductility	to	withstand	fracture	when	embedded	in	concrete,
 6. In global analysis for stages of construction, account should be taken of the 
class of steel section at the particular stage considered.
603.1.3 Classification of Composite Section without Concrete Encasement
	 1.	 A 	steel	compression 	flange	which	is	restrained	 against	buckling	by	effective	
attachment	 to	a 	concrete	flange	by	shear	connectors	 may	be	assumed	to	be	
in class 1 if the spacing of the connector is in accordance with 606.9.
	 2.	 Other	 steel	flanges 	and	webs	in	compression	 in	composite	 girders	should	
be	classified	 on 	the	basis	of	width 	to	thickness	 ratios	(width	and	thickness	
of individual elements shown in fig.5) and proneness to local buckling. 
Accordingly sections are categorized in three groups as indicated in  table 2.
	 3.	 Cross-sections	 with	webs
 	in	Class	3	and	flanges	in	Class	1	or	2	may	be	treated	
as an effective cross-section in Class 2 with an effective web in accordance 

--- PAGE 20 ---
13 IRC:22-2015
with fig. 4. The proportion of the web in compression should be replaced 
by	a	part	of	20ε.tw	adjacent	to	the	compression	 flange,	with	another	part	of	 
20ε.tw adjacent to the plastic neutral axis of the effective cross-section.
Fig. 4  Effective Class 2 Web
603.1.4 Types of Elements
 1. Internal elements are elements attached along both longitudinal edges to 
other elements or to longitudinal stiffeners connected at suitable intervals 
to transverse stiffeners, e.g., web of I-section	and	flanges 	and	web	of	box	
section. 
 2. Outside elements or Outstands are elements attached along only one of 
the longitudinal edges to an adjacent element, the other edge being free to displace	out	of
 	plane	e.g.,	flange	overhang	 of	an	I-section, stem of T-section 
and legs of an angle section.
	 3.	 Tapered	 elements	may 	be	treated	as	flat	elements	having	average	thickness	
as	defined	in 	BIS	publication,	 IS:808-1989	 (Reaffirmed	 2004),	titled,	“Indian	
Standard Dimensions for Hot rolled Steel Beam, Column, Channel and Angle sections.
The	limiting	width
 	to	thickness	 ratios	of	elements	for	different	classifications	 of	sections	are	
given in table 2 based on end conditions of elements as shown in fig. 5 .
table 2  Limiting Width to thickness ratios
compression element ratioclass of Section
class 1
plasticclass 2
compactclass 3
Semi-compact
Outstanding element 
of	compression	flange	Rolled section b/tf9.4ε 10.5ε 15.7ε
Welded section b/ tf8.4ε 9.4ε 13.6ε
Internal element of compression	flangeCompression due to 
bendingb/ t
f29.3ε 33.5ε
42ε
Axial compression b/ tfNot applicable

--- PAGE 21 ---
14IRC:22-2015 
Web of an 
I-H-or box section 
cNeutral axis at mid-depth d/tw 84ε  105ε  126ε
Generally If r1 is negative: d/tw
84
11ε
+r
but ≥ 42ε105 0
11.ε
+r126 0
122.ε
+r
but ≥ 42εIf r1 is positive : d/tw105 0
11 51.
.ε
+r
but ≥ 42ε
Axial compression d/twNot applicable 42ε
Web of a channel d/tw42ε 42ε 42ε
Angle, compression due to bending
(Both	criteria	should	be	satisfied)b/td/t9.4ε9.4ε10.5ε10.5ε15.7ε15.7ε
Single angle, or double angles with the 
components separated, axial compression (All three	criteria	should	be	satisfied)b/t
d/t
(b+d)/tNot applicable15.7ε15.7ε
25ε
Outstanding leg of an angle in contact back-to-
back in a double angle member
d/t 9.4ε 10.5ε 15.7ε
Outstanding leg of an angle with its back in continuous contact with another component
Stem of a T-section, rolled or cut from a rolled 
I-or H-sectionD/t
f8.4ε 9.4ε 18.9ε
Circular hollow tube, including welded tube subjected to moment D/t  42ε
2 52ε2 146ε2
 Circular hollow tube, including welded tube subjected to axial compression D/t Not applicable 88ε
2
Notes:
         a  elements which exceed semi-compact limits are to be taken as slender
         b  ε	=	(250/	fy )1/2
         c  Check	webs	for	shear	buckling	in	accordance	 with	603.5.3.2	 (2)	when	d/t	>	67	ε.	Where,	b	is	the	width	
of the element may be taken as clear distance between lateral supports or between lateral support 
and free edge, as appropriate, t is the thickness of element, d is the depth of the web, D outer diameter of the element, Refer fig. 3.1,Section 603.2.1.
         d
 Different	elements	of	a	cross-section	 can	be	in	different	classes.	In	such	cases	the	section	is	classified	
based	on	the	least	favorable	classification.
         e  The stress ratio r1 and r2	are	defined	as
r1 = 
  r2 = 


--- PAGE 22 ---
15 IRC:22-2015
Fig. 5  Dimensions of Sections
603.2 effective Width of concrete Slab
For strength calculation of composite girders, effective width beff1 of deck slab on either side 
of the girder should satisfy (Ref: fig. 6a).

--- PAGE 23 ---
16IRC:22-2015 
   beff1 = 
  ... 3.1
Therefore the total effective width beff (Ref: fig. 6a ) of deck slabs should be restricted to the 
limits as indicated below in Eq. 3.2 and Eq. 3.3:
603.2.1 Effective Width of Simply Supported Girder
 1. for inner beams
   beff = 
  ... 3.2
 For equal spacing of the girders i.e. B1 = B2 = B
   beff = 
  ... 3.3
 Where,
 L = Actual span of the girder
 Lo = The effective span taken as the distance between points of zero  
 moments ( Lo = L for simply supported girders)
 B =  Equal Centre to centre distance of transverse spans of inner slabs  
 (See fig. 6a).
 2. for outer edge beams
   beff = 
  ... 3.4
 Where, 
Fig. 6a  Effective Widths for Composite Beams
603.2.2 Effective Width for Continuous Girder
The effective width for continuous girder shall be calculated on the same lines as discussed 
in clause 603.2.1  above. The effective span L0 for span moment and support moment for 

--- PAGE 24 ---
17 IRC:22-2015
continuous girders will be as given illustrated by fig. 6b  below.
Fig. 6b  Value of L0 for Continuous Beam
The effective span for outer spans is 0.8 times the actual span. L0 = 0.8L1
The effective span for inner spans is 0.7 t imes the actual span. L0 = 0.7L2
The effective span for intermediate support is 0.25 times the sum of the width of the adjacent 
spans. L0 = 0.25(L1 + L2) or 0.25 (L2 + L3)
Reinforcements placed parallel to the span of the steel beam within the effective width of concrete slab at the continuous support will only be effective in analyzing the hogging moment capacity of the composite girder at the continuous support.
603.2.3 Effective Cross-Section for Strength Calculation –  In calculating the strength of 
the cross section of the composite girders the following should be considered:for positive moment - Concrete in 
 effective width to be included but not the  
    reinforcements.
for negative moment - Concrete to be neglected but longitudinal reinforcement within  
    effective width are to be included.
603.3
 analysis of Structure
603.3.1 Elastic Analysis
Design moments and shears may be calculated by normal elastic method. In case of 
continuous structures with negative moments over supports adjustments may be necessary as mentioned in clause 603.1.  Appropriate load combinations with corresponding load 
factors	are	to	be	used	to	find	out	the	maximum	values	of	moments	and	shears.
Design strength for different sections is to be worked out on the basis of their capacity to 
resist	local	buckling
 	based	on	classification	 given	in	clause 603.1. Design bending strength 
under various stress conditions have been given in annexure–i. The bending moments, 
given in annexure–i, are for full shear connection. Necessary correction due to partial shear 
connection shall be done as also indicated in annexure–i.
The stability of the bridge as a whole against overturning shall be ensured under ultimate limit state as per provisions of IRC:6-2014. The bridge components shall also be safe against sliding under adverse condition of the applied characteristic loads. Following factor of safety shall be ensured:
	 ●	 Factor	of	safety	against	Overturning	 -	 1.30
	 ●	 Factor	of	safety	against	Sliding		 -	 1.2 5

--- PAGE 25 ---
18IRC:22-2015 
603.3.2 Plastic Analysis
Plastic analysis is not permitted to members subjected to impact loading requiring fracture 
assessment	 or	fluctuating 	loading	requiring	fatigue	assessment.	 Thus,	in	bridges	plastic	
analysis is not permitted.
603.3.3 Design of structure (bending moment)
Considering local buckling, sections are to be analyzed as plastic, compact or semi-compact 
as already mentioned with additional consideration.
 1. Load history and development in composite action are to be taken into 
consideration with appropriate values of modular ratio ‘m’ at each stage and 
stresses	and	deflections 	are	to	be	the	summation	 of	values	of	successive	
stage.
 2. Ef fective width of concrete may be as mentioned in clause 603.2. 
The bending moment and shear force distribution in a continuous bridge girder has to be determined by structural analysis.
603.3.3.1 Design of structure (ef fect of lateral buckling on moment):
Lateral Buckling may govern the design under the following conditions:
	
1.	 At	construction 	stage, 	in	the	top	flange	closer	to	mid	span	in	both	simply	
supported and continuous girders.
	 2.	 At	 construction 	and 	service	stage,	in	the	bottom	flange	closer	to	support	in	
continuous girders.
At	the	construction 	stage	the	effect	of	lateral	torsional	buckling	on	the	bottom	flange	in	a	
continuous girder shall be taken care of by considering the girder as a cantilever upto the 
point	of	inflection 	from	the	support.	After	hardening	 of	concrete,	 the	same	lateral	torsional	
buckling	need	to 	be	checked	with	revised	point	of	inflection	and	changed	stiffness 	of	section.	
The	flexural	strength 	corresponding	 to	lateral	buckling	shall	be	determined	 as	per	clause i.5 
of 
annexure–i.
Suitable	horizontal	bracings 	or	members	 may	be	provided	at	the	bottom	flange	to	reduce	
effective	length 	of	compression	 flange	near	support.	For	girders	which	are	provided	with	such	
bracings	or	members 	giving	effective	lateral	restraint	to	the	compression	 flange	at	intervals	
along the span, the effective lateral restraint shall be capable of resisting a force equal to  2.5	percent	of
 	the	maximum	 force	in	the	compression	 flange	taken	as	divided	equally	between	
the numbers of points at which the restraint in bracing members occur.
603.3.3.2 Design against vertical shear and its e f fect on plastic moment capacity
The factored design shear force, V, in a beam due to external actions shall satisfy   V ≤ V
d
where,
 Vd = design shear strength calculated as given below:

--- PAGE 26 ---
19 IRC:22-2015
 Vd = Vn / γm0
 γm0 = partial safety factor against shear failure (601.4)
The vertical shear force is assumed to be resisted by the web of the steel section only unless 
the value for a contribution for the reinforced concrete part of the beam has been established. The nominal shear strength, V
n may be governed by plastic shear resistance or strength of 
the web as governed by shear buckling as discussed below:
1. plastic Shear resistance
The nominal plastic shear resistance under pure shear is given by:
   Vn = Vp
where,
 Vp = 
  ... 3.5
where,
 Av is the shear area, fyw is the yield strength of the web and partial safety factor  
γm0 = 1.10.
note: Shear area may be calculated as below: -
 i) for i and channel Section:
  Major Axis Bending:
  Hot Rolled  =  depth of section x web thickness = h.tw
  Welded = depth of web x web thickness = d.tw
  Minor Axis Bending:
	 	 Hot	Rolled	or	Welded	=	2	x	flange	width	x	flange	thickness
 ii) rectangular Hollow Sections of uniform thickness:
  Loaded parallel to depth (d), Av = Ad / ( b + d)
  Loaded parallel to width (b), Av = Ab / ( b + d)
where, A = Actual area of cross-section
 b =
  Overall breadth of tubular section, breadth of I	section	flanges
	 d	=	 Clear	depth	of	the	web	between	flanges
 iii) circular Hollow t ubes of u niform thickness:
  Aν = 2A / π (Where A = actual area of cross section)
2. Shear Buckling r esistance
The nominal shear strength, Vn, of webs with or without intermediate stiffeners as governed 
by buckling may be evaluated using one of the following methods:
 a) Simple post- critical method	−	The	simple	post	critical	method,	based	
on the shear buckling strength can be used for webs of I-section girders, 

--- PAGE 27 ---
20IRC:22-2015 
with or without intermediate transverse stiffener, provided that the web has 
transverse stiffeners at the supports. The nominal shear strength is given by:
   V
n = Vcr
where,
 Vcr = shear force corresponding to web buckling
 Vcr = Av. τb
where, τ
b = shear stress corresponding to web buckling, determined as follows:
 When λw ≤ 0.8 τb = fyw/
 ... 3.6
 When 0.8 < λw < 1.2 
  ... 3.7
 When λw	≥	1.2	 	
  ... 3.8
where,
 λw = non -dimensional web slenderness ratio for shear buckling stress, given by 
λw = 
  ... 3.9
 The elastic critical shear stress of the web, tcr,e is given by:
 
  ... 3.10
where,
 µ =  Poisson’s ratio
 kv = 5.35 when transverse stiffeners are provided only at supports
  = 4.0 +5.35 / ( c/d)2   for c/d < 1.0
  = 5.35+4.0 / ( c/d)2   for c/d	≥	1.0
where,
 c and d are the spacing of transverse stiffeners and depth of the web, 
respectively.
 b) tension field m ethod	−	The	tension	field	method,	based	on	the	post-
shear buckling strength, may be used for webs with intermediate transverse 
stiffeners, in addition to the transverse stiffeners at supports, provided the panels	adjacent
 	to	the	panel	under	tension	field	action,	or	the	end	posts	
provide	anchorage	 for 	the	tension	fields	and	further	c/d	≥1.0,	where	c,	d	are	
the spacing of transverse stiffeners and depth of the web, respectively. In the tension	field	method,	the	nominal	shear	resistance,	Vn,	is	given	by
   V
n = Vtf
where,
 
  ... 3.11

--- PAGE 28 ---
21 IRC:22-2015
 τb = buckling strength, as obtained from 603.3.3.2 (2) (a)
 fv	=	yield	strength	of	the	tension	field	obtained	from
 
 Ψ = 1.5 τb sin 2φ
 φ	=	inclination 	of 	the	tension	field	=	tan–1 
The	width	of	the	tension	field,	wtf, is given by:
 wtf = d cosφ + (c-sc-st) sin φ
 fyw = yield stress of the web
 d = depth of the web
 c = spacing of stiffeners in the web
 τb = shear stress corresponding to buckling of web 603.3.3.2 (2) (a)
 sc, st	=	anchorage	lengths	of	tension	field	along	the	compression	and	tension			
	 flange 	respectively ,	obtained	from:
  
where,
 Mfr	 =	 reduced	 plastic	moment	capacity	 of	the	respective	 flange	plate	  
 (disregarding any edge stiffener) after accounting for the axial force, Nf  
	 in	the	flange, 	due	to	overall	bending	and	any	external	axial	force	in	the	 
 cross-section, and is calculated as given below:
 Mfr = 
  ... 3.12 
where,
 bf , tf	=	 width	and	thickness	of	the	relevant	flange	respectively
 fyf	 =	 Yield	stress	of	the	flange
603.3.3.3 Reduction in bending resistance unde r high shear force
If V
 is less than 0.6 Vd there is no reduction in the plastic bending resistance of the section. 
When V > 0.6Vd, the bending resistance is reduced as the contribution of web to bending gets 
diminished. Therefore, reduced bending capacity is given as:
 1. plastic or compact Section
 
 , ... 3.13
where, 
	 β	 =	 (2	 V/Vd-1)2
 Md =  plastic design moment of the whole section disregarding high shear  
 force effect considering web buckling ef fects
 V =  factored applied shear force as governed by web yielding or web  
 buckling.

--- PAGE 29 ---
22IRC:22-2015 
 Vd = design shear strength as governed by web yielding or web buckling
 Mfd = plastic design strength of the area of the cross section excluding the  
 shear area, considering partial safety factor γm0
 2. Semi-compact Section
  Mdv = Ze fy / γm0 ... 3.14
where, 
 Ze = elastic section modulus of the whole section
603.3.3.4 Design against longitudinal shear
Design against longitudinal shear and strength of shear connector has to be done as in 
Section 606.0.
603.4 Hybrid Sections
Use of hybrid sections are permitted, with necessary adjustment (reduction) in permissible 
stresses	of	the 	flange	element	in	the	cross	section	with	higher	yield	stress	by	reduction	factor	
Rh. Rh may be determined using the procedure as elaborated in annexure–I.
604  deSign  for  Ser Vicea BiLitY  Limit
604.1 general
Normal	elastic	analysis 	is	to	be	used	for	finding	out	design	moments	 and	stresses	under	
various load combinations and load factors as mentioned in clause 601.3. Concrete is to be 
assumed as unreinforced and uncracked.604.1.1 Method of construction
The stress and strain at serviceability limit state depend on the method of construction, that 
is, whether the steel beam is propped or un-propped during construction.
 1. un-propped construction : 
  In un-pro
 pped construction, the steel beam has to carry the construction load 
including shuttering, wet concrete and its own weight. However under limit 
state of collapse, the total load including transient loads shall be resisted by the composite section.
 2. propped construction : 
  In propp
 ed construction both the dead and live load are resisted by the 
composite section. When props are used, they should be kept in place until the in-situ concrete has attained a characteristic strength equal to approximately twice the stress to which the concrete may be subjected shortly after removal of props.
This difference in the above two methods of construction does not, however, affect the ultimate limit load.

--- PAGE 30 ---
23 IRC:22-2015
604.2 negative moments
Negative moments over intermediate supports are to be adjusted as mentioned in  
clause 603.1 .
604.3	 Stresses	and	Deflection
For	calculating	stresses	and	deflection,	the	value	of	modular	ratio,	 m shall be taken as,
 m = 
  ≥ 7.5 For short-term effect or loading
 m = 
  ≥ 15.0 For permanent or long-term loads (Kc = Creep factor = 0.5)
where,
 Es = Modulus of elasticity for steel = 2.0 x 105 N/mm2
 Ecm = Modulus of elasticity of cast-in-situ concrete (Ref: table-iii .1 of  
 annexure-i)
 fck = chsaracteristic cube compressive strength of concrete in N/mm2
The equivalent area of concrete slab at any stage, however shall be determined by dividing 
the effective width of the concrete slab by the modular ratio,
 m = 
    
where, 
 Eci = Modulus of elasticity of cast-in-situ concrete at i days (i < 28 days)
Final	stresses	and 	deflection	 is	to	be	worked	out	separately	 at	each	stage	of	load	history	with	
relevant modular ratios and section modulus as discussed above and then added together.
604.3.1 Limiting Stresses for Serviceability
 Limiting stresses for different stage of construction are as indicated below:
 1. concrete:
  The allowable compressive stress in concrete shall be as per clause 12.2.1 
of IRC:112-2011.
 2. reinforcement Steel:
  The allowable tensile stress in steel reinforcement shall be as per  
clause 12.2.2 of irc:112-2011.
 3. Structural Steel:
  The concept of equivalent stress shall be adopted to determine the limiting 
stress permissible for steel beam or girder.
  Where a bearing stress is combined with tensile or compressive stress, 
bending and shear stresses under the most unfavourable conditions of 
loading, the equivalent stress, fe, obtained from the following formula shall 
not exceed 0.9 fy.

--- PAGE 31 ---
24IRC:22-2015 
   
  En... 4.1 
 and
   
  En... 4.2 
where,
 fec and fet = equivalent compressive and tensile stress in steel section
 fbc and fbt = actual compressive and tensile stress in steel section
 fp = actual bearing stress in steel section
 τb = actual shear stress in steel section
The value of permissible bending stresses fbc about each axis, to be used in the above 
formula shall be individually lesser than the values of the maximum allowable stresses in 
bending about the corresponding axis.
604.3.2 Limit of Deflection and Camber
Calculated	 deflection	of 	composite	 girder	under	live	load	and	impact	shall	not	exceed	1/800	
of span of the girder.In any case under the worst combination of dead load, super-imposed dead load, live 
load	and	impact
 	effects,	the	total	deflection	 of	the	girder	shall	not	exceed	1/600	of	span.	
Necessary camber may be adopted as per clause 504.6 of IRC:24-2010 to offset the effect of all permanent loads to comply with the above requirement.
The	deflection
 	of	cantilever	 arms	at	the	tip	due	to	dead	load,	live	load	and	impact	shall	not	
exceed	1/300	of 	the	cantilever	 arm	and	the	deflection	 due	to	live	load	and	impact	only,	shall	
not exceed 1/400 of the cantilever arm. Sidewalk live load may be neglected in calculating 
deflection.
When	cross	bracings 	or	diaphragms	 of	sufficient	stiffness	and	strength	are	provided	between	
beams	to	ensure 	the	lateral	distribution	 of	loads,	the	deflections	 may	be	calculated 	considering 	
all beams acting together. In such cases the gross moment of inertia of equivalent section 
may	be	used	for	calculating	the	deflection	of	the	composite	bridge	girder	system.
604.4 control of cracking in concrete
Minimum reinforcements in terms of diameter and spacing required for crack control at top of 
concrete as per clause 12.3.3 of IRC:112-2011 is to be provided in composite girders, at the 
zone of negative moment, to prevent cracking adversely affecting appearance and durability of structure. Crack width calculation as well as limiting crack width as given in clause 12.3.4 
and 12.3.2 respectively of IRC:112-2011 may be followed subject to discretion of engineers. 
For control of cracking without direct calculation, reference shall be made to the directions 
provided in clause 12.3.6 of IRC:112-2011.
604.5 t emperature e
 ffect
For Temperature effect, Section 215 of IRC:6-2014 may be referred to.

--- PAGE 32 ---
25 IRC:22-2015
605  deSign  for  fatigue  Limit
605.1 general
Fatigue is to be checked under fatigue vehicular live load with impact and with the application 
of appropriate load factor. Stresses are to be assessed by elastic theory and elastic properties of the section with no adjustment for support moments.
For the purpose of design against fatigue, different details (of members and connections) 
are	classified	under
 	different	fatigue	class.	The	design	stress	range	corresponding	 to	various	
number of cycles, are given for each fatigue class. The requirements of this section shall be	satisfied	with,
 	at	each	critical	location	subjected	 to	cyclic	loading,	considering	 relevant	
number of cycles and magnitudes of stress range expected to be experienced during the life of the structure.
	 Definitions:
	 Stress	Range	 −	 Algebraic	 difference
 	between	two	extremes	 of	stresses	in	 
   a cycle of loading at a location.
	 Detail	Category	−	 Designation	 given	to 	a	particular	 detail	to	indicate	the	S-N	 
   curves to be used in fatigue assessment.
	 Fatigue	 	 −	 Damage	 caused	by 	repeated	fluctuations	 of	stress,	leading	  
   to progressive cracking of a steel structural element.
	 Fatigue	Strength	−	 Stress	 range	capacity 	for	a	category	of	detail,	depending	  
   upon the number of cycles it is required to withstand during  
   its design life.
	 S-N	Curve	 –	 Curve,	 defining	the	relationship 	between	the	numbers	of	 
   stress cycles to failure (Nsc) at a constant stress range  
   ( Sc),	during	fatigue	loading	on	a	specific	detail	category	of	 
   a structure.
605.2 fatigue d esign
The standard S-N Curves for each detail category are given for the following conditions:
 a) The detail is located in a redundant load path, wherein local failure at that 
detail alone will not lead to overall collapse of the structure.
 b) The nominal stress history at the local point in the detail is estimated/ 
evaluated by a conventional method without taking into account the local 
stress concentration effects due to the detail
 c) The load cycles are not highly irregular
 d) The details are accessible for and subject to regular inspection
 e) The structure is exposed to only mildly corrosive environment as in normal 
atmospheric condition and suitably protected against corrosion (pit depth < 1 mm)

--- PAGE 33 ---
26IRC:22-2015 
 f) The structure is not subjected to temperature exceeding 150ºC
	 g)	 The	 transverse 	fillet 	or	butt	weld	connects	 plates	of	thickness	 not	greater	
than 25 mm
 h) Holes in members and connections subjected to fatigue shall not be made
	 ●	Using 	punching	in	plates	having	thickness	 greater	than	12	mm	unless	
the holes are subsequently reamed to remove material strain hardened 
during punching
	 ●	Using 	gas	cutting	unless	the	holes	are	reamed	to	remove	the	material	
in the Heat Affected Zone (HAZ)
The	values	obtained 	from	the	standard	S-N	Curve	shall	be	modified	by	a	capacity	reduction	
factor µr,	when	plates	greater	than	25	mm	in	thickness	 are	joined	together	by	transverse	 fillet	
or butt-welding, which is given by
   µr = (25/tp)0.25	≤	1.0
where, t
p = actual thickness in mm of the thicker plate being joined
No thickness correction is necessary when full penetration butt weld reinforcements are 
machined	flush	and	proved	free	of	defect	through	nondestructive	testing.
determination of stress:  Elastic analysis of structure shall be done to obtain stress resultants 
and any conventional stress analysis may be done to determine the stress at the location. 
The normal and shear stresses on a member shall be done considering the effect of all design actions on the members. Stress concentration due to geometry of detail may be excluded. The stress concentration, however, not characteristic of the detail shall be accounted for in the stress calculation.
Low fatigu
 e: Fatigue assessment is not required for a member, connection or detail, if 
normal and shears design stress ranges f, satisfy the following conditions:
 f < 27/γmft
or if the actual number of stress cycles, NSC,	satisfies
 NSC < 5x106 
where,
 γmft, γfft = partial safety factors for strength and load, respectively
 f = actual fatigue stress range for the detail
p
artial Safety factor for actions and their effects (γfft): The partial safety factor for loads 
in the evaluation of stress range in fatigue design shall be taken as 1.0.
partial Safety factor for fatigue Strength (γmft): The partial safety factor for strength is 
influenced	by	consequences	of	fatigue	damage	and	level	of	inspection	capabilities.

--- PAGE 34 ---
27 IRC:22-2015
Based	on	consequences	 of	fatigue	failure	as	defined	below,	the	partial	safety	factor	for	fatigue	
strength shall be as given in the table 3.
	 ●	 Fail-safe	 structural	component/detail 	is	the	one	where	local	failure	of	one	
component due to fatigue crack does not result in the failure of the total 
structure due to availability of alternate load path (redundant system).
	 ●	 Non-fail-safe	 structural	component/detail 	is	the	one	where	local	failure	of	
one component leads rapidly to failure of the total structure due to its non-redundant nature.
table 3  partial Safety factor for fatigue Strength ( γmft)
inspection and access consequence of failure
fail-Safe non-fail-Safe
Periodic inspection and maintenance, accessibility to detail is good 1.00 1.25
Periodic inspection and maintenance, poor accessibility for detail 1.15 1.35
605.3 fatigue Strength
The fatigue strength for any standard details as described in table 8 for normal or shear fatigue 
stress range not corrected for the effects as described in clause 605.2  is given below:
 for normal Stress range
 When NSC ≤ 5 x 106  
  ... 5.1 
 When 5 x 106 ≤ NSC ≤ 108 
  ... 5.2 
 for Shear Stress range,
 
  ... 5.3 
where,
 ff, τf = design normal and shear fatigue stress range of the detail, respectively, for 
life cycle of NSC
 ffn,τfn = design normal and shear fatigue strength respectively of the detail for   
   5 x106 cycles as given in t able 4, 5 & 6 .
Table	4		Detail	Category	Classification	Group	-1;	Non-Welded	Details
detail 
categoryconstructional details
illustration (See note) description
118
roLLed and eXtruded productS
1)	Plates	and	flats
2) Rolled sectionsSharp	edges,	surface
 	and	rolling	flaws	to	
be removed by grinding in the direction of 
applied stress.

--- PAGE 35 ---
28IRC:22-2015 
detail 
categoryconstructional details
illustration (See note) description
103
BoLted connectionS
(3) & (4): Stress range calculated on the 
gross section and on the net section.
Unsupported one-sided cover plate 
connections shall be avoided or the effect of the eccentricity taken into account in calculating stresses.
materiaL WitH gaS-
 cut or SHeared 
edgeS WitH no dragLineS
(5): All hardened material and visible signs 
of edge discontinuities to be removed by machining or grinding in the direction of applied stress.
92
materiaL WitH macHine gaS-cut 
edgeS WitH dragL ineS or manuaL 
gaS-cut materiaL
(6): Corners and visible signs of edge 
discontinuities to be removed by grinding in the direction of the applied stress.
Table	5		Detail	Category	Classification	Group	-	2;	Welded	Details
detail 
categoryconstructional details
illustration (See note) description
92
WeLded pLate i-Section and 
BoX girderS WitH continuouS 
LongitudinaL WeLdS
(7) & (8) Zones of continuous automatic 
longitudinal	 fillet	or 	butt	welds	carried	out	
from both sides and all welds not having un-repaired stop-start positions.
Note: The arrow indicates the location and direction of the stresses acting in the basic material for 
which the stress range is to be calculated on a plane normal to the arrow
.

--- PAGE 36 ---
29 IRC:22-2015
detail 
categoryconstructional details
illustration (See note) description
83
WeLded paLte I-Section and 
B
oX girderS WitH continuouS 
LongitudinaL WeLdS
(9) & (10) Zones of continuous automatic 
butt welds made from one side only with a continuous backing bar and all welds not having un-repaired stop-start positions.
(11)	Zones	of
 	continuous	 longitudinal	 fillet	
or butt welds carried, out from both sides 
but containing stop-start positions. For continuous	 manual	longitudin
 al	fillet	or	butt	
welds carried out from both sides, use Detail Category 92.
66
WeLded pLate I-Section and 
B
oX girderS WitH continuouS 
LongitudinaL WeLdS
(12) Zones of continuous longitudinal welds 
carried out from one side only, with or without stop-start positions.
59
intermittent LongitudinaL WeLdS
(13) Zones of intermittent longitudinal welds
52
intermittent LongitudinaL WeLdS
(14) Zones containing cope holes in 
longitudinally welded T joints.  Cope hole not to	be	filled	with	weld.
Note: The arrow indicates the location and direction of the stresses acting in the basic material for 
which the stress range is to be calculated on a plane normal to the arrow
.table 5 (continued)

--- PAGE 37 ---
30IRC:22-2015 
detail 
categoryconstructional details
illustration (See note) description
83
tranSVerSe Butt WeLdS (compLete 
penetration)
Weld run-off tabs to be used, subsequently 
removed	and	ends 	of	welds	ground	flush	in	
the direction of stress. Welds to be made from two sides.
(15)	Transverse	 splices
 	in	plates,	flats	and	
rolled sections having the weld reinforcement 
ground	flush	to 	plate	surface.	100	percent	
NDT inspection and weld surface to be free of exposed porosity in the weld metal.
(16) Plate girders welded as (15) before 
assembly.
(17) Transverse splices as (15) with reduced 
or tapered transition with taper ≤1:4.
66
tranSVerSe Butt WeLdS (compLete 
penetration)
Welds run-off tabs to be used, subsequently 
removed	and	ends 	of	welds	ground	flush	in	
the direction of stress. Welds to be made from two sides.
(18) Transverse splices of plates, rolled 
sections or plate girders.
(19) Transverse splice of rolled sections 
or welded plate girders, without cope hole. With cope hole use Detail Category 52, as per (14).
(20)	Transverse	 splices
 	in	plates	or	flats	
being tapered in width or in thickness where 
the taper is ≤1:4 made from two sides
59
tranSVerSe Butt WeLdS (compLete 
penetration)
Weld run-off tabs to be used, subsequently 
removed	and	ends 	of	welds	ground	flush	in	
the direction of stress. Welds to be made from two sides.
(21) Transverse splices as per (20) With 
taper in width or >1:4.but ≤1:2.5.
Note: The arrow indicates the location and direction of the stresses acting in the basic material for 
which the stress range is to be calculated on a plane normal to the arrow
.table 5 (continued)

--- PAGE 38 ---
31 IRC:22-2015
detail 
categoryconstructional details
illustration (See note) description
52
tranSVerSe Butt WeLdS (compLete 
penetration)
(22) Transverse butt-welded splices made 
on	a	backing 	bar.	The	end	of	the	fillet	weld	of	
the backing strip shall stop short by greater than 10 mm from the edges of the stressed plate.
(23) Transverse butt welds as for
(22) With taper on width or thickness 
<1:2.5.
37
tranSVerSe Butt WeLdS (compLete 
penetration)
(24) Transverse butt welds as (22) where 
fillet	welds	end 	closer	than	10	mm	to	plate	
edge.
52
cruciform JointS WitH Load-
carr Ying  WeLdS
(25) Full penetration welds with intermediate plate NDT inspected and free of defects. Maximum misalignment of plates either side of joint to be <0.15 times the thickness of intermediate plate.
41 (26)
(26)	Partial	penetration	 or	fillet	welds	with	
stress range calculated on plate area.
27 (27)(27)	Partial	penetration 	or	fillet	welds	with	
stress range calculated on throat area of 
weld.
46
oVerLapped WeLded JointS
(28) Fillet welded lap joint, with welds and 
overlapping elements having a design capacity greater than the main plate. Stress in the main plate to be calculated on the basis of area shown in the illustration.
Note: The arrow indicates the location and direction of the stresses acting in the basic material for 
which the stress range is to be calculated on a plane normal to the arrow
.table 5 (continued)

--- PAGE 39 ---
32IRC:22-2015 
detail 
categoryconstructional details
illustration (See note) description
41 (29)
(29) Fillet welded lap joint, with welds and 
main plate both having a design capacity greater than the overlapping elements.
33 (30)(30) Fillet welded lap joint, with main plate and overlapping elements both having a design capacity greater than the weld.
66(31) (32)
WeLded attacHementS (non-Load 
car Ying  WeLdS) LongitudinaL 
WeLdS
(31)	Longitudinal 	fillet	welds.	Class	of	
detail varies according to the length of the 
attachment weld as noted.
(32) Gusset welded to the edge of a plate 
or	beam	flange. 	Smooth	transition	radius	(r),	
formed	by	machining 	or	flame	cutting	plus	
grinding. Class of detail varies according to r/b ratio as noted.— 1/3≤r/b
59 l≤50 mm —
5250<l 
≤100 mm1/6 ≤ r/
b<1/3
37 100mm < l —
33 — r/b<1/6
59
WeLded attacHmentS
(33) Shear connectors on base material 
(failure in base material).
59 t ≤ 12 mm
tranSVerSe WeLdS
(34)	Transverse	 fillet 	welds	with	the	end	
of the weld ≥10 mm from the edge of the 
plate.
(35) Vertical stiffeners welded to a beam 
or	plate	girder 	flange	or	web	by	continuous	
or intermittent welds. In the case of webs carrying combined bending and shear design actions, the fatigue strength shall be determined using the stress range of the principal stresses.
(36) Diaphragms of box girders welded to the 
flange	or	web
 	by	continuous	 or	intermittent	
welds. 52 t < 12 `mm
Note: The arrow indicates the location and direction of the stresses acting in the basic material for 
which the stress range is to be calculated on a plane normal to the arrow
.table 5 (continued)

--- PAGE 40 ---
33 IRC:22-2015
detail 
categoryconstructional details
illustration (See note) description
37tf or tp ≤  
25 mm
coVer pLateS in BeamS and pLate 
girderS
(37) End zones of single or multiple welded 
cover plates, with or without a weld across the end. For a reinforcing plate wider than the	flange,	an	end	weld	is	essential.27t
f or tp >  
25 mm
67
WeLdS Loaded in SHear
(38) Fillet welds transmitting shear. Stress 
range to be calculated on weld throat area.
(39) Stud welded shear connectors (failure 
in the weld) loaded in shear (the shear stress range to be calculated on the nominal section of the stud).
Table	6		Detail	Category	Classification	Group	-	3	Bolts
detail 
categoryconstructional details
illustration (See note) description
83
BoLtS in SHear (8.8/tB BoL ting 
categor Y onLY)
(40):Shear stress range calculated on the 
minor diameter area of the bolt (Ac).
note:	If	the	shear	on	the	joint	is	insufficient	
to cause slip of the joint the shear in the bolt need not be considered in fatigue.
27
BoLtS and tHreaded rodS in 
tenSion (tensile stress to be calculated 
on the tensile stress area At)
(41): Additional forces due to prying effects shall be taken into account. For tensional bolts, the stress range depends on the connection geometry.
note: In connections with tensioned bolts, 
the change in the force in the bolts is often less than the applied force, but this effect is dependent on the geometry of the connection. It is not normally required that any allowance for fatigue be made in calculating the required number of bolts in such connections. 
note: The arrow indicates the location and direction of the stresses acting in the basic material for 
which the stress range is to be calculated on a plane normal to the arrow
.table 5 (continued)

--- PAGE 41 ---
34IRC:22-2015 
Fig. 7a S-N Curve for Normal Stress
605.4 fatigue assessment
The design fatigue strength for NSC life cycles (ffd,τfd) is given as
 ffd	=	μr ff /γmft ... 5.4 
 τ fd	=	μr τf /γmft ... 5.5 
where,
	μr =  correction factor (discussed in 605.2)
 γmft = partial safety factor against fatigue failure, given in table 3.
 ff , τf =  normal and shear fatigue strength ranges for the actual life cycle, NSC,  
 obtained from Section 605.3 for the detail.
Stress limitations:
The (absolute) maximum value of the normal and shear stresses shall never exceed the 
elastic limit (fy, τy) for the material under cyclic loading.

--- PAGE 42 ---
35 IRC:22-2015
The maximum stress range shall not exceed 1.5 fy for normal stresses and 1.5 
  for the 
shear stresses under any circumstance.
Fig. 7b S-N Curve for Shear Stress
constant Stress range:
The actual normal and shear stress range f and τ at a point of the structure subjected to NSC 
cycles in life shall satisfy. f ≤ f
fd
 p ≤ τfd
Variable Stress range:Fatigue assessment at any point in a structure, wherein variable stress ranges f
fi or τfi for ni 
number of cycles (i =1 to r) are encountered, shall satisfy the following;1. For Normal Stress ( f)
 
 ... 5.6 
2. For Shear Stresses (τ)
 
  ... 5.7 

--- PAGE 43 ---
36IRC:22-2015 
Where lower case γs is the summation upper limit of all the normal stress ranges ( fi) having 
magnitude lesser than (µr ffn /γmft) for that detail and the lower limit of all the normal stress 
ranges (fj) having magnitude greater than (µr ffn /γmft) for the detail. In the above summation all 
normal stress ranges, fi, and ti having magnitude less than 0.55 µr.ffn, and 0.55 µr.τfn may be 
disregarded.
605.5 exemption from fatigue assessme nts
No	fatigue	assessment	is	required	if	the	following	conditions	are	satisfied:
 1. The highest normal stress range ff max	satisfies
  ff max ≤ 27μr/γmft ... 5.8 
 2. The highest shear stress range τ  fmax	satisfies
  τ fmax ≤ 67μr/γmft ... 5.9 
 3. The total number of actual stress cycles NSC,	satisfies
  NSC ≤ 5 × 106 
  ... 5.10 
where,
 ff eq = equivalent constant amplitude stress range in MPa given by
 
ffi, ffj = stress ranges falling above and below the ffn, the stress range corresponding to the 
detail at 5 x 106 number of life cycles.
606  SHear  connector
606.1 design of Shear connectors
 1. Shear connection and transverse reinforcement shall be provided to transmit 
the longitudinal shear force between the concrete and the structural steel 
element, ignoring the effect of natural bond between the two.
 2. Shear connectors may be either of mild steel or high tensile steel irrespective 
of the grade of steel used in the parent girder. Flexible shear connectors are preferred because of their better performance. Channel, Angle and Tee shear connectors may be of mild steel, whereas, the shear studs may be mad of high tensile steel.
 3. Shear 
 connector shall be generally designed for full transfer of longitudinal 
shear. Shear connector strength and spacing are to be checked separately for all the limit states using appropriate factored load combinations and factored 

--- PAGE 44 ---
37 IRC:22-2015
strength. All shear connectors should be capable of resisting uplift of slab from 
steel section. Channel and stud shear connectors provide adequate safety against uplift. Headed stud shear connectors may be assumed to provide sufficient	resistance	 to
 	uplift,	unless	the	shear	connection	 is	subjected	 to	
direct tension, in which case they should be supplemented by anchoring devices.
	 4.	 For	 verification 	for
 	ultimate	limit	states,	the	shear	connectors	 provided	
in terms of size and shape may be kept constant over any length where the design longitudinal shear per unit length does not exceed the design shear resistance by more than 10 percent. Over every such length, the total design longitudinal shear force should not exceed the total design shear resistance.
606.2 Longitudinal Shear
Longitudinal Shear load on connectors of composite section, whether simply supported or continuous is to be calculated for service and fatigue limit states on the basis of elastic theory using appropriate sectional properties based on effective widths and modular ratios as per the load history and development of composite action.
606.3 design Strength of Shear connectors
Shear connectors are to be checked for ultimate limit and fatigue limit states.606.3.1 Ultimate strength of shear connectors
Design	static	strengths
 	and	fatigue	strengths	 of	flexible	shear	connectors	 mainly	stud	
connectors and channel connectors can be determined by the following equations:1. Stud c
 onnectors
The design resistance, Qu of stud shears connectors shall be as given below:
 Qu = 
  ... 6.1 
where,
   
 Qu = design strength of stud in newton (N)
 γv = partial safety factor for stud connector = 1.25
 d = diameter of the shank of the stud in milli meters (mm)
 fu = ultimate tensile strength of the stud material ≤ 500 N/mm2
 fck(cy) = Characteristic cylindrical compressive strength of concrete = 0.8 fck
 hs = nominal height of stud in millimeters (mm)
 Ecm = Secant modulus of elasticity of concrete (Refer: table–III.1 of  
 annexure-iii)

--- PAGE 45 ---
38IRC:22-2015 
2. channel connectors
Assuming that the web of the channel is vertical with the shear applied nominally perpendicular 
to the web, the design resistance of a channel connector shall be determined as given below:
 Q
n = 
  ... 6.2 
where,
 Qu =  design strength of channel in newton (N)
 b = leng th of the channel in millimeters (mm)
 h = heig ht of the channel in millimeters (mm)
While using channel shear connectors the following recommendation need to be followed. 1. The 
 height h of the channel should not exceed 20 times web thickness or 
150 mm whichever is less.
 2. The width b of the channel should not exceed 300 mm.
	
3.	 The	 underside 	of 	the	top	flange	of	the	channel	should	not	be	less	than	 
30 mm clear above the bottom reinforcement.
 4. The leg length of the weld connecting the channel to the plate should not 
exceed half the plate thickness.
The design strengths of some standard shear connectors have been given in table 7 for 
easy reference.
table 7  ultimate Static Strengths of Shear connectors ( Qu for different concrete Strengths)
type of connector connector material ultimate Static Strength in kn 
per connector for concrete 
Strengths fck (mpa)
25 30 40 50
Stud connectors Material with a characteristic 
yield strength of 385 MPa, minimum elongation of 18% and a characteristic tensile strength of 495 MPa
112
87
72684626125
9780765129149
115
95916134156120100100
6436Nominal Diameter
(mm)
252220201612Overall height
(mm)
100100100
757565
Channels: 150 mm long (min)ISMC 125ISMC 100ISMC 75As per IS 2062
244206166259219176285241194307260209
notes: 1. fck	is	the	specified	characteristic	cube	strength	at	28	days.
 2. Strengths for concrete of intermediate grade may be obtained by linear interpolation.

--- PAGE 46 ---
39 IRC:22-2015
 3. For channels of lengths different from those quoted above, the capacities are  
 proportional to the lengths for lengths greater than 150 mm.
 4. For rolled angle and tee shear connectors, the values given for channel connectors are  
 applicable provided the height is at least equa l to that of the channel.
 5. For stud connectors of overall height greater than 100 mm the design static strength  
 should be taken as the values given in the tab le for 100 mm high connectors.
 6. The above provisions of Stud Connectors are not applicable to composite slab  
	 using	 profiled	deck. 	Static	strength	of	shear	connector	 in	such	cases	can	be	 
 established by experimental push-out tests.
 7. The number of shear connectors given by the above table shall be distributed in  
 the zone between the maximum and the zero moment sections. The number of  
 connectors required  from fatigue consideration will usually exceed the requirement  
	 from	 flexural	strength. 	However,	 if	the	flexural	requirement	 exceeds	the	number	  
 required from fatigue point of view as mentioned in clause 606.4.2 additional connectors  
 should be provided to ensure that the ultimate strength of the composite section is  
 achieved.
 8. In order to avoid undesirable slip, the maximum interface shear per unit length due  
 to superimposed dead load and live load under service conditions at any point in  
	
the	beam	should	be 	as 	specified	in	clause 606.4.1 .
606.3.2 Fatigue Strength of Shear Connectors
The fatigue shear stress range (fatigue Strength) of shear connector shall be obtained from 
fig. 7b  corresponding to the design load life cycle, NSC.
The strength shall be determined as given below:
 ττff nS C xN= 5106 5/  ... 6.3 
 τfn = design normal and shear fatigue stress range respectively of the detail  
 for 5 x106 cycles as given in table 5.
 τfn = 67 N/mm2 for stud connector (refer:- t able 5, Detail Category–67)
 τfn = 59 N/mm2 for channel connector (Ref. Table 5, Detail Category–59)  
	 [provided	 that	the 	thickness	 of	the	top	flange	of	steel	girder	is	greater	  
 than or equal to 12 mm and the edge distance from the end of weld to  
	
the	edge	of 	the	top	flange	is	10	mm.]
The nominal fatigue strengths of some standard shear connectors have been indicated in 
table 8.
table 8  nominal fatigue Strengths Qr (in kN)
type of connectors connector material n = nos. of cycles
1 x 1055 x 1052 x 1061 x 1071 x 108
Headed Studs φ 25 fy = 385
fu = 495
Elongation = 18%71 52 39 28 18
Headed Studs φ 22 55 40 30 22 14
Headed Studs φ 20 46 33 25 18 11
Headed Studs φ 16 29 21 16 11 7
Channel 150 long for a 
nominal weld of 8 mmIS:2062 109 79 60 43 27

--- PAGE 47 ---
40IRC:22-2015 
For intermediate stress cycles the values may be interpolated from log scales (i.e. the above 
equation). Other connectors, if used, should have their capacities established through tests.
606.4 Spacing and d esign of Shear connectors
606.4.1 Ultimate Limit State (Strength Criteria)
Calculated shear VL at interface corresponding to vertical shear is as given below:
   
  ... 6.4 
where,
 VL Longitudinal shear per unit length
 V The vertical shear forces due to dead load and live load (including impact) 
separately at each state of load history
.
 Aec The transformed compressive area of concrete above the neutral axis of the 
composite section with appropriate modular ratio depending on the nature of load (whether short term i.e. live load, or long term i.e. dead load)
 Y C.G. distance of transformed concrete area from neutral axis.
 I Moment of Inertia of the composite section using appropriate modular ratio.
 dl, ll Different load history condition, i.e. sustained load or composite action dead 
load, 
transient load or composite action live load. These loads are to be 
considered with appropriate load factor at this stage.
  Spacing of Shear connectors is given as SL1 = 
 Qu is the Ultimate static strength of one shear connector (Clause 606.3.1 
and table 7) and the summation is over the number of shear studs at one 
section.
606.4.1.1
 For full shear connection
The maximum longitudinal force due to bending moment is to be calculated over the shear span from zero moment to maximum moment section and is given by
   H
1 = Asl . fy. 10-3/γm ... 6.5 
   H2 = 0.36 . fck .Aec.10-3 ... 6.6 
where, H
1, H2 = Longitudinal Force due to bending (kN)
 Asl = Area of Tensile Steel (mm2) in longitudinal direction
 Aec = Effective area of concrete
  = beff .xu (for neutral axis within the slab)
  = beff. ds (for neutral axis in steel section)

--- PAGE 48 ---
41 IRC:22-2015
The	ultimate	flexural	strength	of	any	composite	 construction	 is	governed	 by	either	of	the	
aforesaid equation. Therefore, the maximum possible compressive force in the composite 
beam will be governed by H, which is the smaller of H1 and H2	and	sufficient	connectors	
should be provided to resist the longitudinal force H.
Spacing of Shear Connectors is given as SL2 = 
606.4.2 Serviceability Limit State (Limit State of Fatigue)
Calculated longitudinal shear per unit length, Vr at interface due to live load and impact is as 
given below:
 Vr  = 
  {Vr, Aec, Y and I, are as explained above}
 VR  Vertical Shear difference due to maximum and minimum shear envelop  
due to live load and impact
 ll is live lo ad with impact
Spacing of Shear connectors from fatigue consideration is given as SR = 
 Qr is the Nominal fatigue Strength one shear connector which is to be taken 
from t able 8.
For Full shear connection the greatest of SL1, SL2 and SR is to be provided as the actual 
spacing of the shear connectors.
606.5 partial shear connection
When all cross-sections are in Class 1 or Class 2, partial shear connection may be used for 
girders. The number of connectors shall then be determined by a partial connection theory taking into account the deformation capacity of shear connector. The bending resistance of the section under partial shear connection shall be determined as per clause i.1.2 of 
a
nnexure–i.
Headed studs with an overall length after welding not less than 4 times its diameter and with shank diameter not less than 16 mm and neither greater than 25 mm, may be considered as ductile with following limits for the degree of shear connection, which may be generally defined	as,	S
c = np/nf
[Where, Sc is the Degree of shear connection nf is the number of shear connectors required 
for full shear connection determined for the length of a beam under consideration and np is 
the number of shear connectors provided within that same length]
1.	 For	steel	sections	with	equal	flanges:
 Le	≤	25	 Sc	≥	1	–	
  .(0.75 – 0.03Le) Sc	≥	0.4	 ...	6.7	
 Le > 25 Sc	≥	1.0	 ...	6.8	

--- PAGE 49 ---
42IRC:22-2015 
2.	 For	 steel	sections	having	a	bottom	flange	with	an	area	of	three	times	the	area	of	
top	flange	with	equal	flanges:
 Le	≤	20	 Sc	≥	1	–	
  .(0.30 – 0.015Le) Sc	≥	0.4	 ...	6.9	
 Le > 20 Sc	≥	1.0	 ...	6.10	
 Where Le overall span for a simply supported girder and is the distance between 
the point of zero bending moment within one span of a continuous girder.
3.	 For	 steel	sections 	having	a	bottom	flange	with	an	area	exceeding	 the	area	of	the	
top	flange	but 	less	than	three	times	that	area,	the	limit	for	Sc may be determined 
from expressions in (1) and (2) above by linear interpolation.
606.6 detailing of Shear connector
Details as shown in following sketch ( fig. 8 ) are to be followed.
Fig. 8a  Details of Stud Connector
Fig. 8b  Details of Angle/Channel Connector
Fig. 8c  Longitudinal Section
Fig. 8  Details of Connector on Steel Girders
The	diameter	of	the	stud	connector	 welded	to	the	flange	plate	shall	not	exceed	twice	the	plate	

--- PAGE 50 ---
43 IRC:22-2015
thickness. The height of the stud connectors shall not be less than four times their diameter or 
100 mm. The diameter of the head of the stud shall not be less than one and a half times the diameter	of	the
 	stud.	The	leg	length	of	the	weld	joining	other	types	of	connectors	 to	the	flange	
plate	shall	not 	exceed	half	the	thickness	 of	the	flange	plate.	Channel	and	angle	connectors	
shall	have	at 	least	6	mm	fillet	welds	placed	along	the	heel	and	toe	of	the	channels/angles.	
The	clear	distance 	between	the	edge	of	the	flange	and	the	edge	of	the	shear	connectors	 shall	
not be less than 25 mm.
606.6.1 Precautions for separation of steel girder from concrete
To	resist	separation 	with	the	steel	girder,	top	flange	of	stud	and	channel	shear	connectors	 shall	
extend into the deck slab at least 40 mm above bottom transverse reinforcements and also a 
minimum	of	40 	mm	into	the	compression	 zone	of	concrete	flange.	Where	a	concrete	haunch	
is	used,	between 	the	steel	flange	and	the	soffit	of	the	slab,	top	flange	of	the	stud	or	channel	
shear connectors shall extend upto at least 40 mm above the transverse reinforcements in	the	haunc
 hes,	provided	the	reinforcements	 are	sufficient	to	transfer	longitudinal	 shear.	
Where shear connectors are placed adjacent to the longitudinal edge of the slab, transverse reinforcement provided in accordance with clause 606.11  shall be fully anchored in the 
concrete between the edge of the slab and the adjacent row of connectors.
606.6.2 Overall height of connector
The overall height of a connector including any hoop, which is an integral part of the connector, 
shall be at least 100 mm with a clear cover of 25 mm.
606.7 details of Haunches
The	dimensions 	for
 	haunches	 if	provided	between	top	of	steel	girder	and	soffit	of	slab	shall	be	
as indicated in fig. 9, the sides of haunches being located outside a line drawn at 45 degrees 
from the outside edge of the base of the connector.
Fig. 9 Dimension of Haunches
606.8 cover to Shear connectors
The clear depth of concrete cover over the top of the shear connectors shall not be less than 
25 mm. The horizontal clear concrete cover to any shear connector shall not be less than  50 mm as shown in fig.10.

--- PAGE 51 ---
44IRC:22-2015 
Fig. 10  Cover to Connectors
606.9 Limiting criteria for Spacing of Shear connectors
	 1.	Where	a	steel	compression	flange	that	would	otherwise	be	in	a	lower	class		
 is assumed to be in Class 1 or Class 2 because of restraint provided by shear  
 connectors, the centre-to-centre spacing of the shear connectors in the   
 direction of the compression should satisfy the  following:
 a) Where the slab is in contact over the full length (e.g. solid slab)
 
  SL ≤ 21+f 
  ... 6.11 
 b) Where the slab is not in contact over the full length (e.g. slab with ribs 
transverse to the beam)
   SL ≤ 14+f 
  ... 6.12 
where,
 tf	 is	the	thickness	of	the	flange
 fy	 is	the	nominal	yield	strength	of	the	flange	N/mm2.
 SL is the maximum spacing of the shear connector
In	addition,	the 	clear	distance	from	the	edge	of	the	compression	 flange	to	the	nearest	line	
of shear connectors should not be greater than 9.t f  
  or 50 mm which whichever is 
less.
 2. In all cases, shear connector shall be provided throughout the length of the 
beam 
and may be uniformly spaced between critical cross sections. The 
maximum spacing of shear connectors in the longitudinal direction shall be 
limited to 600 mm or three times the thickness of the concrete slab or four times the height of the connector (including any hoop which is an integral part of the connector) whichever is least.
	 3.	 Minimum	 spacing	should
 	be	such,	as	to	allow	proper	concrete	flow	and	
compaction around the connectors and for stud connectors it should not be 
less than 75 mm.
606.10 t ransverse Shear c heck
Shear connectors transfer longitudinal shear from steel girder to slab concrete abutting them, where from the same is transferred to the rest of the slab through transverse shear 

--- PAGE 52 ---
45 IRC:22-2015
strength of slab as well as transverse reinforcements provided. The strength and amount of 
reinforcement is to be checked by the following relations.
The shear force transferred per meter length VL shall satisfy both the following conditions:
 1.  VL ≤ 0.632
  ... 6.13 
  or
  VL ≤ 0.232
  + 0.1.Ast . f yk .n ... 6.14 
where,
 VL = Longitudinal shear force per unit length calculated for ultimate limit  
 state
 fck = Characteristic strength of concrete in MPa
 fyk = Yield stress of transverse reinforcement in MPa
 L = Length (in mm) of possible shear plans e nvelop as indicated in fig. 11
 n = Number of times each lower transverse reinforcing bar is intersected by  
 a shear surface (i.e. the number of rows of shear connector at one  
 section of the beam). Generally for T -beam n = 2 and for L-beam n = 1
 Ast = Sectional areas (in cm2) of transverse reinforcements per metre run of  
 beam
The amount of transverse steel in the bottom of the slab shall not be less than 
  cm2/m, 
where VL is in KN/m.
Fig. 11  Typical Shear Planes(c)

--- PAGE 53 ---
46IRC:22-2015 
606.11 t ransverse reinforcements
Planes, which are critical for longitudinal shear failure, in the process of transfer of longitudinal 
shear from the girder to the slab, are of four main types, as shown in fig.11. If the concrete 
by	itself	is	insufficient	 to	take	the	longitudinal	 shear,	sufficient	transverse	 reinforcements	 shall	
be provided to transfer longitudinal shear force from the girder to the effective width of the slab. The area of transverse reinforcement per unit length of beam will be the sum total of all the reinforcement (A
t, Ah or Ab as shown in fig. 12 a, b and c), which are intersected by the 
shear plane and are fully anchored on both the sides of the shear plane considered.
Fig. 12a  Non-Haunched Beam
Fig. 12b  Large Haunched Beam
Fig. 12c  Small Haunched Bean
Fig. 12  Transverse Reinforcement Across Shear Planes
606.12 t otal t ransverse reinforcements
The total transverse reinforcements Ast, per unit length of beam in case of shear  
plane 1–1 which crosses the whole thickness of the slab will be the sum of ( At + Ab) 
(see fig. 12a). Area of reinforcements At and Ab	include	those	provided	for	flexure.	The	
total transverse reinforcements across plane 2–2 (fig. 12a) is Ast = 2Ab and that across  
plane 3–3 (fig. 12b) is Ast = 2Ah as these planes do not cross the full thickness of the slab. In 
case of shear plane 4–4 ( fig. 12c), the total transverse reinforcement is Ast = 2 (Ab + Ah).

--- PAGE 54 ---
47 IRC:22-2015
The transverse reinforcements shall be placed at locations as shown in fig. 13. The haunch 
bars shall be extended beyond the junction of bottom bars by a length equal to the anchorage 
length.
Fig. 13a  Stud Connector in Un-Haunched Beam
 Fig. 13b  Channel Connector in Un-Haunched 
Beam
Fig. 13c Stud Connector in Haunched Beam
 Fig. 13d  Channel Connector in Haunched 
Beam
Fig. 13  Arrangement of Transverse reinforcements
607  compoSite  coLumnS
607.1 general
 1. This Clause applies to columns and compression members with steel grade 
conforming to IS 2062 and normal weight concrete of strength M25 to M90.
 2. This Clause applies to isolated columns and compression members in framed 
structures where the other structural members are either composite or steel 
members.
 3. The steel contribution ratio δ 	should	fulfill	the	criteria:
	 	 0.2	≤	δ	≤	0.9	where	δ	is	defined	in	section	607.6.
	 4.	 The	 influence	of 	local	buckling	of	the	steel	section	on	the	resistance	 of	the	
composite section as a whole shall be considered for design.
 5. The effects of local buckling may be neglected for a steel section fully 
encased in accordance with Section 607.2 , and for other types of  
cross-section provided the maximum width to thickness ratio given in  
Section 607.4 are not exceeded.
 6. Composite Columns can be of two types:
 a) Encased where concrete encases the steel section [ f ig. 14a]

--- PAGE 55 ---
48IRC:22-2015 
	 b)	 In-filled	 where	concrete	fills	the	hollow	tubular	or	hollow	box	Section	  
[fig. 14b ].
607.2 construction particular
 1. In composite columns consisting of fully encased steel sections, concrete 
shall be adequately held by steel wires and stirrups and with all round cover 
of	at	least	40	mm	or	one-sixth	of	the	breadth	b	of	the	flange,	over	steel	section	
that should be unpainted but cleaned at abutting surface to ensure protection against corrosion and spalling of concrete. Shear transfer between steel concrete interfaces is ensured basically through bond for which calculated shear stress at interface shall be kept limited in accordance with table 13, 
beyond which mechanical shear connectors are to be provided.
 2. The cover to reinforcement should be in accordance with IRC:1
 12-2011.
607.3 members under axial compression
Standard composite sections used as columns are as shown below:
Fig. 14a  Fully and Partially Concrete Encased Columns
Fig. 14b  Concrete Filled Hollow Sections
607.3.1 General Design Philosophy
 1. Design for structural stability shall consider second-order ef fects including  
residual stresses, geometrical imperfections, local instability, cracking of 
concrete, creep and shrinkage of concrete and yielding of structural steel and of reinforcement.
 2. Second-order 
 effects shall be considered in any direction in which failure 
might occur,	if	they	affect	the	structural	stability	significantly.

--- PAGE 56 ---
49 IRC:22-2015
 3. Internal forces should be determined by elasto-plastic analysis.
 4. Full composite action between steel and concrete shall be considered up to 
failure.
 5. Ef fects of creep and shrinkage shall be considered if they are likely to reduce 
the	structural	 stability 	significantly.	 For	simplification,	 creep	and	shrinkage	
effects	may	be 	ignored	if	the	increase	in	the	first-order	 bending	moments	due	
to creep deformations and longitudinal force resulting from permanent loads 
is not greater than 10 percent.
607.3.2 Design Guidelines
 1. For a fully encased steel section, see fig. 14a, limits to the maximum 
thickness of concrete cover that may be used in calculation are:
   Cz (max) = 0.3 h
   Cy (max) = 0.4 b
 2. The longitudinal reinforcement that may be used in calculation should not 
exceed 6 percent of the concrete area.
 3. The ratio of the cross-section’ s depth hc to width bc, see fig. 14a, should be 
within the limits.
607.4 Local Buckling of Steel Section
The equations for determining the plastic resistance of an encased steel section or concrete filled	rectangular/square 	
 or	circular	tubular	section	 Pp as discussed subsequently in the next 
clauses is valid provided that local buckling in the steel sections does not occur. To prevent premature local buckling, the width to thickness ratio of the steel sections in compression must satisfy the following limits:
	 ●	
	for	concrete	filled	circular	tubular	sections
	 ●	
 	for	concrete	filled	rectangular	tubular	sections
	 ●	
  for partially encased I sections
where,
 
  and fy is the yield strength of the steel section in MPa
For fully encased steel sections, the above local buckling check is not required. However, the 
concrete	cover	to 	the	flange	of	a	fully	encased	steel	section	should	not	be	less	than	40	mm,	
nor less than one-sixth of the breadth, b,	of	the	flange
Design	of	concrete 	filled	rectangular	 tubular	sections	where	 h/t ratios exceed the local buckling 
limits	for	semi-compact	sections,	should	be	verified	by	tests.

--- PAGE 57 ---
50IRC:22-2015 
607.5 Short compression members
A compression members is termed as a ‘short compression member’ when its non-dimensional 
slenderness ratio λ ≤ 0.2.
Non-dimensional slenderness ratio  λ is given as
 
where,
 Ppu is the plastic resistance of the cross-section to compression and is given 
 Ppu = As.fy + αc.A c. [0.80fck] + A st .f yk ... 7.1 
where,
 fy, yield strength of steel section.
 fck characteristic compressive strength (cube strength) of the concrete
 fyk yield strength of the reinforcing steel
 αc	 strength	coefficient	for	concrete
	 =	 1.0	for	confined	concrete	in	tubular	sections
 = 0.85 for fully or partially concrete encased steel sections with lateral ties
 = 0.89 for fully or partially encased concrete columns with spiral ties.
` [note: While providing spiral ties it must be ensured that the ratio of the   
 volume of helical reinforcement to the volume of the core is not   
 less than 0.36( Ag/Aco–1)fck/fyk
(Ag = Gross area of section; Aco = Area of core of the helically reinforced column measured to 
the outer diameter of the helix)]
 Pcr is the elastic buckling load of the column
 Pcr = 
Where (EI)e	is	the	effective	elastic	flexural	stiffness	of	the	composite	 column.	 l is the effective 
length of the column, which may be conservatively taken as system length L for an isolated 
non-sway composite column.
607.5.1 Encased Steel Sections and Concrete filled Rectangular/Square Tubular  
 Sections
The	plastic	resistance 	of	an	encased	steel	section	or	concrete	filled	rectangular	 or	square	
section	(i.e.	α.	the	so-called	“squash	load”)	is	given	by P
p = As.fy / γ m + αc.A c. [0.80 fck] / γ c + A st .fyk / γs ... 7.2
where, fy, (fck), fyk	and	αc	are	as	discussed	earlier.
607.5.2 Concrete Filled Circular Tubular Sections
There	is	an 	increased	 resistance	 and	ductility	of	concrete	due	to	the	confining	effect	of	the	
circular	tubular	section. 	However,	this	effect	is	significant	 only	in	stocky	columns.	In	composite	

--- PAGE 58 ---
51 IRC:22-2015
columns with a non-dimensional slenderness of 
 	≤	0.5	(see	 Section 607.6 & 607.7) or 
where the eccentricity of the applied load does not exceed the value d/10, (where d is the 
outer dimension of the circular tubular section) this effect has to be considered.
The	plastic	compression 	resistance	 of	concrete	filled	circular	tubular	sections	is	calculated	 by	
using	two	coefficients	 η1 and η2 as given below.
 
  ... 7.3 
where,
 t is the thickness of the circular tubular section, and η1 and η2	two	coefficients	
which	account	for	confinement	effect	and	are	given	by
 η 1 = η 10 
  and 
 η 2 = η 20 + (1 – η 20) 
The	resistance	 of	a	concrete	filled	circular	tubular	section	to	compression	 may	increase	by	
15	percent	under 	axial	load	only	when	the	effect	of	tri-axial	confinement	 is	considered.	 Linear	
interpolation is permitted for various load eccentricities of e	≤	d/10. The basic values η10 and 
η20 depend on the non-dimensional slenderness 
 , which can be read off from table 9.
If the eccentricity ‘e’ exceeds the value d/10, or if the non-dimensional slenderness exceeds 
the value 0.5 then η1 = 0 and η2 = 1.0.
table 9  Basic Value η10 and η20	to	Allow	for	the	Effect	of	Tri-Axial	Confinement
 = 0.0
  = 0.1
  = 0.2
  = 0.3
  = 0.4
  ≥ 0.5
η104.90 3.22 1.88 0.88 0.22 0.00
η200.75 0.80 0.85 0.90 0.95 1.00
607.6 effective elastic flexural Stiffness
 1. Short term Loading: 	The	ef fective	 elastic	flexural	stiffness,	(EI)e, is obtained 
by	adding	up 	the	flexural	stiffness	of	the	individual	 components	 of	the	cross-
section:
   ( EI) e = Es Is + 0.6 Ecm Ic + Est.Ist ... 7.4
where,  E
s and Est are the modulus of elasticity of the steel section and the 
reinforcement respectively
  Ecm is the secant modulus of the concrete
 2. Long term Loading : For slender columns the effect of long-term loading 
should be considered 
  > 0.2.
If the eccentricity ‘e’ of loading is more than twice the cross-section dimension ‘ D’ or e > 2 D, 
the	effect	on 	the	bending	moment	distribution	 caused	by	increased	 deflections	 due	to	creep	

--- PAGE 59 ---
52IRC:22-2015 
and shrinkage of concrete will be very small and may be neglected. Moreover, effect of long-
term loading need not be considered if the non-dimensional slenderness, 
  (Ref: Section 
607.6) of the composite column is less than the limiting values given in table 10.
table 10  Limiting Values of 
  for Long t erm Loading
 Braced non-Sway Systems un-Braced and/or Sway System
Concrete encased cross-section 0.8 0.5
Concrete	filled	cross-section
note: δ	is	the	steel	contribution	ratio	defined	as
   
  ... 7.5 
When 
  exceeds the limits prescribed above and e/D < 2, the effect of creep and shrinkage 
of concrete should be allowed for by adopting modulus of elasticity of concrete Ecs instead of 
Ecd where Ecs	is	defined	as	follows:
  Ecs = 0.75 Ecm 
  ... 7.6 
where,
 P the applied factored load
 Pdd the part of the applied factored load permanently acting on the column.
The	effect	of 	long-term	 loading	may	be	ignored	for	concrete	filled	tubular	sections	with	 
	≤	2.0	provided	that	 δ is greater than 0.6 for braced (non-sway) columns, and 0.75 for 
Unbraced (sway) columns.
607.7 resistance of member Subjected to axial compression
The isolated non-sway composite columns need not be checked for buckling, if anyone of the 
following	conditions	is	satisfied:
 a) The axial force in the column is less than 0.1 Pcr where Pcr is the elastic 
buckling load of the column
 b) The non-dimensional slenderness 
  is less than 0.2.
To check the safety of a compression member, check for buckling about each principal axis 
of the composite section need to be done as below,
  
Now,
Pp is the plastic resistance to compression as discussed in clause 607.3 .
   
  ... 7.7 

--- PAGE 60 ---
53 IRC:22-2015
Where,
   
  ... 7.8 
 
 
  = Non-dimensional slenderness ratio as discussed in clause 607.6
	 α	 =	 Imperfection	 factor	as 	given	in	table 11 which allows for different levels  
 of imperfections and residual stresses in columns corresponding to 
 curves a
, b and c
The buckling curve to be adopted for design shall be selected according to type of section 
and the axis of bending as given blow:
Curve a	 for	 concrete	filled 	tubular	sections	with	reinforcement	 percentage	 less	than	3	
percent of gross cross section area
Curve b for fully or partially concrete encased I-sections buckling about the strong axis of the 
steel 
sections (x-x	 axis)	and	for	concrete	filled	tubular	sections	with	reinforcement	
percentage more than 3 percent of gross cross section area.
Curve c for fully and partially concrete encased I -sections buckling about the weak axis of 
the steel sections (y-y axis)
Table	11		Imperfection	Factor	α	for	the	Buckling	Curves
Buckling curve a b c
Imperfection Factor 0.21 0.34 0.49
607.8 combined compression and Bending
 1. When the bending moment in the section is zero (i.e. M = 0), the permissible 
compression is as given in Section 607.5  and Section 607.7 . (Ref: Point A 
in interaction curve shown in fig. 15.).
Fig.	15		Interaction	Curve	for	Compression	and	Uni-Axial	Bending	Using	the	Simplified	Method
 2. For zero compressive force in the section the plastic moment of resistance 
of the cross section is given as (Ref: Point B in curve shown in fig. 15 )

--- PAGE 61 ---
54IRC:22-2015 
 Mp = (Zps – Zpsn) fy /γm + (Zpr – Zprn) fyk /γs + αc.0.8.(Zpc – Zpcn) fck /γc ... 7.9 
where,
 Zps, Zpr, and Zpc plastic section modulii of the steel section, reinforcement and  
  concrete about their own centroids respectively
 Zpsn, Zprn and Zpcn plastic section modulii of the steel section, reinforcement and  
  concrete about neutral axis of gross cross section respectively
While determining the plastic resistance of a section the following criteria shall be 
considered:
	 1.	 The	 influence	of 	transverse	 shear	forces	on	the	resistance	 to	bending	and	
axial force should be considered when determining the interaction curve. 
If the shear force V on the steel section exceeds 50 percent of the design 
shear resistance Vp	of	the	steel	the	influence	 of	the	transverse	 shear	on	
the resistance in combined bending and compression should be taken into account	by	a
 	reduced	design	steel	strength	(1	-	β)	fy/γm in the shear area  
Av	(β	is	determined	as	per	 Section 603.3.3.3.
 2. Unless a more accurate analysis is used, V may be distributed into Vs acting 
on the structural steel and Vc, acting on the reinforced concrete section by :
   Vs = 
   Vc = V – Vs
where,
 Mps is the plastic moment of resistance of steel section alone
 Mp is the plastic moment of resistance of the entire composite section
607.8.1 Second Order Effects on Bending Moment
The second order effects on bending moments for isolated non-sway columns shall be 
considered	if	both	of	the	following	conditions	are	satisfied:
 i) 
Where P is the design applied load, and Pcr is the elastic critical load of the composite 
column.
 ii) Elastic slenderness conforms to:
 
 
  > 0.2
Where 
  is the non-dimensional slenderness of the composite column.
In case the above two conditions are met, the second order effects may be allowed for by 
modifying	 the	maximum 	first	order	bending	moment	(moment	obtained	initially),	 Mmax, with a 

--- PAGE 62 ---
55 IRC:22-2015
correction factor k,	which	is	defined	as	follows:
   k = 
  1.0
where,
 P applied design load and
 Pcr	 is	the	elastic	critical	load	for	the	relevant	axis	and	corresponding	 to	a	modified	
effective	flexural	stif fness	given	by	(EI)em with the effective length taken as 
the composite column length
 Cm equivalent moment factor given in table 12.
Table	12		Imperfection	Factor	α	for	the	Buckling	Curves
moment distribution moment factor (Cm) comment
First-order bending moments from 
member imperfection or lateral load::
C
m = 1.0M is the maximum bending moment within the column length ignoring second-order effects
End Moments:
Cm	=	0.66	+	0.44	r	≥	0.44M or r.M are the end moments 
from	first-order	 or 	second-
order global analysis.
A	simplified	approach	in	considering	the	value	of	 Cm is as indicated below:
 Cm  = 0.85 for members whose ends are restrained against rotation
  = 1.0 for members whose ends are un-restrained against rotation
 (EI) e = 0.9 (Es Is + 0.5 Ecm Ic + Est.Ist)
607.8.2 Resistance of Members Subjected to Combined Compression and Uniaxial  
 Bending Moment
 1. The section shall be checked for resistance under axial compression for both 
x and y-axes.
 2. The resistance of the section shall then be checked for combined axial 
compression and uniaxial bending moment as described below.
The design against combined bending and axial compression is adequate when the following 
condition	is	satisfied:
   M ≤ 0.9 µ.Mp
Where M is the design bending moment, which may be factored to allow for second order 
effects, if necessary, as described in Section 607.8.1(2).

--- PAGE 63 ---
56IRC:22-2015 
The moment resistance ratio µ for a composite column under combined compression and 
uniaxial bending shall be evaluated as follows:
 µ = 
   when 
  ... 7.10 
 and
 µ = 1 – 
  when 
  ... 7.11 
Where,
 χc = Axial resistance ratio due to concrete = 
Where, Pc = 0.8αc.fck.Ac /γc
 χd = Design axial resistance ratio = 
 χ = reduction factor due to column buckling
607.8.3
 Resistance of Members Subjected to Combined Compression and bi-axial  
 Bending Moment
 1. The section shall be checked for resistance under axial compression for both 
x and y axes.
 2. The resistance of the section shall then be checked for combined axial 
compression and bi-axial bending moment as described below.
The	three	necessary	conditions	to	be	satisfied	are:
 
  and 
      
The interaction of the moments must also be checked using the following interaction 
formula:
   
  ... 7.12 
The moment resistance ratios µx and µy for both the axes shall be evaluated as given 
below:
 
   ... 7.13 
 
  ... 7.14 
 and
 
  ... 7.15 
 
  ... 7.16 

--- PAGE 64 ---
57 IRC:22-2015
where,
 χx and χy are the reduction factors for buckling in the x and y directions 
respectively.
When the effect of geometric imperfections is not considered the moment resistance ratio is 
evaluated as given below:
 
    when χd >χc
 = 1.0    when χd ≤ χc
607.9 mechanical Shear connection and Load introduction
Proper sharing of loads between steel section and concrete should be ensured at points of 
load introduction due to load and moment reactions coming from members connected to the ends of the column and also for loads applied anywhere within the length of the column, considering the shear resistance at the interface between steel and concrete.
Where	composite 	column
 s	and	compression	 members	are	subjected	 to	significant	 transverse	
shear, for example by local transverse loads and by end moments, provision shall be made 
for the transfer of the corresponding longitudinal shear stress at the interface between steel and concrete.
For axially loaded columns and compression members, longitudinal shear outside the areas 
of load introduction need not be considered.
607.9.1 Load Introduction
Shear connectors should be provided at areas of load introduction and at areas with change 
in cross-section if the design shear strength τ (table 13) is exceeded at the interface between 
steel 
and concrete. The shear forces should be determined from the change of sectional 
forces of the steel or reinforced concrete section within the introduction length. If the loads are introduced into the concrete cross-section only, the values resulting from an elastic analysis considering creep and shrinkage should be taken into account. Otherwise, the forces at the interface should be determined by elastic theory or plastic theory, to determine the more severe case.
In absence of a more accurate method, the introduction length should not exceed 2 d or L/3, 
where d is the minimum transverse dimension of the column and L is the column length.
table 13  design Shear Strength ( τ)
type of cross-Section τ (n/mm2)
Completely concrete encased steel sections
Concrete	filled	circular	hollow	sectionsConcrete	filled	rectangular	hollow	sectionsFlanges of partially encased sectionsWebs of partially encased columns0.300.550.400.200.00

--- PAGE 65 ---
58IRC:22-2015 
Due to the action of creep and shrinkage, no shear connection is required for composite 
columns or compression members if the load application is by endplates where the full interface between steel and concrete is permanently under compression. Otherwise the load application/introduction	should	be	verified	as	elaborated	below:
 1. If 
 the cross section is partially loaded as shown in fig. 16a , the loads may 
be distributed with a ratio of 1:2.5 over the thickness te of the end plate. 
The concrete stresses should then be limited in the area of effective load 
introduction.
	 2.	 For	 concrete	filled 	circular	hollow	section	or	square	hollow	section,	under	
partial loading as shown in fig. 16B, for example by gusset plates or by 
stiffeners, the local design strength of concrete σc under the gusset or 
stiffener resulting from the sectional forces of the concrete section shall be determined as
   σ
c = 
  ... 7.17 
where,
 t is the wall thickness of the steel tube;
 d diamete r of the tube or width of the square section;
 Ac is the cross sectional area of the concrete section of the column;
 A1 is the loaded area under the gusset plate (See fig. 16 );
 η0 = 4.9 for circular steel tubes and 3.5 for square sections
Fig.	16		Partially	Loaded	Circular	Concrete	filled	Hollow	Section

--- PAGE 66 ---
59 IRC:22-2015
 3.	 For	concrete	filled 	circular	hollow	section	longitudinal	 reinforcements	 may	
be taken in to account while determining the resistance of the composite 
column, even if the reinforcement is not directly connected to the end plate, provided that the gap e.g. ( fig 16a ) between the end of reinforcement and 
the surface of the end plate does not exceed 30 mm.
607.9.1.1 Shear connection
When mechanical connection is introduced in the form of stud connectors to the web of a fully or partially concrete encased steel I-section, account may be taken of the frictional 
forces that develop from the prevention of lateral expansion of the concrete by the adjacent steel	flanges.	This
 	resistance	 is	assumed	 to	be	equal	to	µ.Qu / 2	on	each	flange	and	each	
horizontal row of studs as shown in fig. 16  and may be added to the calculated resistance 
of the shear connectors. µ	is	the	relevant	coefficient	 of	friction	and	be	taken	as	0.5.	Qu is the 
resistance of a single stud as per Section 606.3.
The	clear	distance 	between	the	flanges	should	not	exceed	the	values	given	in	fig. 17 to 
ensure	the	development	of	the	frictional	forces	between	concrete	and	steel	flanges.
Fig. 17  Additional Frictional Forces in Composite Columns by use of Headed Studs
607.9.2 Longitudinal Shear Outside the Area of Load Introduction
 1. Outside the area of load introduction, longitudinal shear at the interface 
between	concrete	and 	steel	should	be	verified	where	it	is	caused	by	transverse	
loads and/or end moments. Shear connectors should be provided based on 
the distribution of the design value of longitudinal shear, where this exceeds the design shear strength τ. In absence of a more accurate method, elastic 
analysis, considering long-term effects and cracking of concrete, may be used to determine the longitudinal shear at the interface. Provided that the surface of the steel section in contact with the concrete is unpainted and free from oil, grease and loose scale or rust, the values given in table 13 may be 
assumed 
for τ. The value of τ given in table 13 for fully concrete encased 
steel 
sections applies to sections with a minimum concrete cover of 40 mm. 
For greater concrete cover and adequate reinforcement, higher values of τ 
may	be	used. 	Unless	verified	by	tests,	for	completely	 encased	sections	the	
increased value βc. τ may be used, with βc given by:

--- PAGE 67 ---
60IRC:22-2015 
 
  ... 7.18 
where,
 Cz is the wall thickness of the steel tube;
 Cz,min diameter of the tube or width of the square section;
 Ac is the cross sectional area of the concrete section of the column;
 A1 is the loaded area under the gusset plate (See fig. 16 );
 η0 = 4.9 for circular steel tubes and 3.5 for square sections
	 2.	 Unless	 otherwise	verified, 	for	partially	encased	I-sections	 with	transverse	
shear due to bending about the weak axis caused by lateral loading or end 
moments, shear connectors should always be provided. If the resistance of the	structural	 steel
 	section	alone	against	transverse	 shear	is	not	sufficient	
to take care of the total transverse shear on the composite section, then the required transverse reinforcement for the shear force V
c, according to 607.8 
should be welded to the web of the steel section or should pass through the web of the steel section.
607.10 Shear c
 heck
The factored shear force in the compression members should be less than the design shear strength of the member, which is, the sum total of the shear resistance given by the concrete section alongwith steel reinforcements as per IRC:112-2011 and the shear resistance given by the steel section as per clause 603.3.3.2 . The shear force shall 
be distributed between the steel section and the concrete section in accordance with  Section 607.9.
608  fiLLer  Beam  decKS  for  BridgeS
Filler beam decks shall be used with its own restrictions as far as geometrical dimensions, spacing	of	steel	girder,	section	classifications	and	detailing.
608.1	 Specific	Requirements
The	basic	requirements
 	for	satisfactory	 application	 and	adoption	of	filler	beam	decks	are	as	
indicated below:
 1. Spans may be both simply supported and continuous and shear connectors 
are not required.
 2. The structural steel sections may be both rolled and welded section and 
should be constant throughout the entire length of the section.
	 3.	 Decks	with	longitudinal	filler	beams	should	comply	the	following	conditions:
 a) The steel beams shall be straight in horizontal projection.
 b) The skew angle of the supports shall not be greater than 300.
 c) The nominal depth h (Ref: fig. i.5  of annexure- I) of the steel beams 
shall be minimum 250 mm and maximum 1100 mm.

--- PAGE 68 ---
61 IRC:22-2015
 d) The spacing of webs of the steel beam shall not exceed the lesser of 
[h/3 + 600] mm or 750 mm, h is the nominal depth of the steel beam.
 e) The concrete cover c, above the steel beam shall satisfy the following 
three conditions,
 c ≥ 70 mm
 c ≤ 150 mm
 c ≤ h/3
	 f)	The 	soffit	of	the	lower	flange	of	the	steel	beam	shall	not	be	encased.
 g) A  bottom layer of transverse reinforcements shall be provided which 
will pass though the webs of the steel and shall be anchored beyond the end steel beam upto the edge of concrete and should be high bond bars. The minimum diameter of these reinforcement bars shall be  16 mm with a maximum spacing of 300 mm.
	 h)	The
 	concrete	in	the	filler	beam	decks	shall	be	normal-weight	concrete.
	 4)	 The	 clear	distance 	between	the	upper	flanges	of	the	steel	beams	should	not	
be less than 150 mm to allow proper pouring of concrete.
	 5)	 The	 minimum	concrete 	cover	for	the	flanges	of	the	steel	beam	at	the	side	of	
the deck shall be 80 mm.
 6) The surface of the steel beam shall be de-scaled.
	
7)	 The	exposed	surfaces 	of	the	lower	flange	of	the	steel	beams	shall	be	protected	
against corrosion.
608.2 global analysis
 1. c lause 603.1  shall be applicable for analysis of girders, both simply supported 
and continuous.
	 2.	 Under	 serviceability 	limit 	states,	deflection	 shall	be	calculated	 as	per	 
clause 604.3  using equivalent section under cracked condition.
 3. In case of non-uniform application of load in the transverse direction of the  
filler	beam	deck, 	after	concrete	hardening;	 the	analysis	shall 	take	into	account	
the	difference	 between 	the	deflections	 between	 adjacent	 filler	beams.	
However,	 if	it 	is	verified	that	sufficient	accuracy	is	obtained	by	a	simplified	
analysis considering one rigid cross section, the same can be done based on the designer’s discretion.
	 4.	 The	influence	of	shrinkage	in	concrete	may	be	ignored.
 5. In 
 longitudinal bending, the effect of slip between steel beams and concrete 
may be ignored.
 6. In transverse bending, the presence of steel beams shall be ignored.
	
7.	 The	influence	of	shear	lag	may	be	ignored.

--- PAGE 69 ---
62IRC:22-2015 
	 8.	 The	 contribution	 of	formwork	 supported	 from	the	bottom	flange	of	steel	
beams, which becomes a part of the permanent construction as shown in 
fig. i.5  of annexure-I shall be ignored.
608.3	 Section	Classifications
The	steel	outstand 	flange	of	a	composite	 section	should	be	classified	 as	shown	in	table 3 
below:
Table	14		Classification	of	Steel	Flange	of	Filler	Beams
 with fy in N/mm2 Stress Distribution 
(Compression Positive)
class type Limit
1
Rolled or Weldedc / t	≤	9	ε
2 c / t	≤	13	ε
3 c / t	≤	19	ε
A web in Class 3 which is encased in concrete may be represented by an effective web of the 
same cross-section in Class 2.
608.4 Bending m oments
The	permissible 	longitud inal	bending	moment	or	the	bending	strength	of	a	filler	beam	has	
been given in clause i.6  of annexure-I. Check for construction stage bending moment must 
be	verified.	 The	 calculations	shall	be	done	and	checked	as	per	IRC:24-2010.
608.5 Vertical Shear
The
	resistance 	to 	vertical	shear	of	a	filler	beam	girder	shall	conservatively	 be	taken	as	the	
resistance of the structural steel section alone and shall be as per procedure laid down 
in clause 603.3.3.2. However, the contribution from the reinforced concrete part between 
adjacent	filler	beams 	may	be	taken	into	account	if	it	is	determined	 and	verified	as	per	 
Section 10 of irc:112-2011 .
608.6 minimum reinforcement
The minimum reinforcements in the concrete section shall be as per guideline given in  
IRC:112-2011.

--- PAGE 70 ---
63 IRC:22-2015
609  precaSt  SLaB  on  SteeL  BeamS
The use of precast slab, both full depth and partial depth is allowed for composite construction 
as one of the components of Composite girders.
609.1 full depth pre-cast Slab
Full-depth precast concrete deck panels may be used for new bridge construction as well 
as for replacement of deteriorated, concrete decks on existing bridges. This system typically consists of precast concrete panels, placed adjacent to one another on bridge girders. The typical requirements for these types of girders are as given below:
 1. Panels 
 shall either span the full width of the bridge deck or shall be in panels 
that span between the girders. Minimum thickness of slab shall be 200 mm.
 2. The panels shall be connected to the girders using shear pocket connectors, 
which consist of mechanical connectors such as shear studs encapsulated in 
grouted pockets. These connections cause the panels to develop composite action with the girders.
609.2 partial depth pre-cast Slab
Partial-depth precast concrete deck panels are generally thin RCC/prestressed concrete 
panels that span between girders and also serve as stay-in-place forms for the cast-in-place concrete deck. The typical geometrical and parameters which governs the use of these panels as composite unit for the girder system are as given below:
 1. Minimum thickness of the precast panels shall be 75 mm.
 2. Dimensions 
 of the pre-cast panels shall be chosen from consideration of 
easy handling, ease of lifting by cranes and for catering to the construction 
loads including load of wet concrete.
	 3.	 Partial-depth	 panels	must 	be	capable	of	developing	 sufficient	 composite	
action with the cast-in-situ concrete to be an effective bridge deck system.
 4. T o ensure full bond between the cast-in-situ concrete and precast panels, it 
is recommended that the top surface of the panel is intentionally roughened before the placement of the cast-in-situ concrete. In addition, the surface must also be cleaned by removing the laitance or other contaminates on the surface.
 5. As 
 a composite deck system, the cast-in-situ concrete and the partial-
depth panels together create the total thickness of the slab, with the panel’s reinforcing steel serving as the positive moment reinforcement in the transverse direction of the bridge.
 6. After 
 the pre-cast panels are in place, the top layers of reinforcing steel shall  
be placed, and the cast-in-situ concrete shall be placed on top of the panels.

--- PAGE 71 ---
64IRC:22-2015 
609.3 general design principle
 1. The pre-cast slab together with any in-situ concrete (for partial depth slab) 
should be designed as continuous in both the longitudinal and the transverse 
direction. The joints between slabs should be designed to transmit membrane forces as well as bending moment and shear forces.
 2. Ef
 fective width of pre-cast slab shall be calculated as per clause 603.2.
 3. The design principles of composite girders involving either full depth or 
partial depth precast slabs are similar to standard composite decks using cast-in-situ reinforced concrete. The stress diagram as shown in figs. i.1, i
 .2 
and i.3 is applicable for positive bending moment and fig. i.4  is applicable 
for hogging moment at support under ultimate limit states as indicated in annexure-I.
 4. V
 ertical shear check shall be done as per clause 603.3.3.2 .
 5. For serviceability limit states, guidelines given in Section 604 and 605  shall 
be followed.
609.4 Joints Between Steel Beam and p re-cast concrete Slab
 1. Where pre-cast slabs are supported on steel beams without bedding 
the	influence 	of	the	vertical	tolerances	 of	the	bearing	surfaces	shall	be	
considered.
	 2.	 The	 shear	transfer 	between	steel	flange	and	precast	concrete	 though	
mechanical shear connector shall be designed as per Section 606  with the 
following precautions:
 a) If shear connectors welded to the steel beam project into the recesses 
within	the	slabs 	or	joints	between	slabs,	which	are	filled	with	concrete	
after erection, the detailing and the properties of the concrete shall be such that it can be cast properly.
	 b)	The
 	minimum	 infill	around	the	shear	connectors	 should	be	at	least	  
25 mm.
	 c)	If 	shear	connectors	 are	arranged	 in	groups,	sufficient	 reinforcement	
should be provided near each group to prevent premature local failure in either the pre-cast or the in-situ concrete.
 d) Special 
 provision for protection against corrosion shall be adopted, 
wherein,	the	steel 	flange	under	pre-cast	slabs	without	bedding	should	
have the same corrosion protection as the rest of the steel work but for a top coating provided after erection. Bedding with the purpose of protecting against corrosion may be designed to be non-load bearing.
609.5 Joints Between pre-cast m
 embers
The critical sections of members close to joints should be designed to resist the worst 
combination of shear, axial force and bending caused by the ultimate vertical and horizontal 

--- PAGE 72 ---
65 IRC:22-2015
forces. When the design of the precast members is based on the assumption that the joint 
between them is not capable of transmitting bending moment (see clause 609.4 ), suitable 
precautions should be taken to ensure that if any crack develops, it will not excessively reduce the member’s resistance to shear or axial force and will not lose any aesthetic value.
Where	a	space
 	is	left	between	two	or	more	pre-cast	units,	to	be	filled	later	with	in-situ	concrete	
or sometimes mortar, the space should be large enough for easy placement and adequate 
compaction	of	the	filling	material,	which	should	fill	the	gap	completely.
609.6 Structural c onnection at Joints
When designing and detailing the connections across joints between pre-cast members the 
overall stability of the structure, including its stability during construction, shall be considered. A typical Joint connection is as shown in fig. 18 below:
Fig. 18  Typical Joint Connection for Partial Depth Precast Slab
609.6.1 Design Method
Connections should, where possible, be designed in accordance with the generally accepted 
methods applicable to reinforced concrete, or structural steel.
609.6.2 General Considerations in Design Details
In additional to ultimate strength requirements the following should be considered:
 1. p rotection:– Connections should be designed so that the standard of 
protection against weather and corrosion required for the rest of the structure 
is	sufficiently	maintained.
 2. a ppearance: – Where connections are to be exposed, they should be 
designed to achieve and maintain the quality of appearance required for the rest of the structure.
 3. m
 anufacture assembly and erection:- Methods of manufacture and 
erection should be considered during design, and the following points should be given particular attention.
 a) Where 
 projecting bars or sections are required, they should be kept 
to a minimum and made as simple as possible. The lengths of such 
projections should be not more than necessary.

--- PAGE 73 ---
66IRC:22-2015 
 b) Fixing devices should be located in concrete sections of adequate 
strength.
 c) The practicability of both casting and assembly should be considered.
 d) Most connections require the introduction of suitable jointing material. 
Sufficient	 space	should 	be	allowed	in	the	design	for	such	material	to	
ensure	that	the	proper	filling	of	the	joint	is	applicable.
609.6.3 Factors Affecting Design Details
The	strength	and 	stiffness	of	any	connection	 can	be	significantly	 affected	by	workmanship	 on	
site. The following points should be considered where appropriate:
 1. Sequence of forming the joint.
 2. Critical dimensions allowing for tolerances, e.g. minimum permissible 
bearing.
 3. Critical details, e.g. accurate location required for a particular reinforcing 
bar.
	 4.	 Method	of	correcting	possible	lack	of	fit	in	the	joint.
 5. Details of temporary propping and time when it may be removed.
 6. Description of general stability of the structure with details of any necessary 
temporary bracing.
 7. How far the uncompleted structure may proceed in relation to the completed 
and matured section.
609.6.4 Reinforcement Continuity at Joint
Where continuity of reinforcement is required through the connection, the jointing method 
used should be such that the assumptions made in analyzing the structure and critical sections are realized. The standard methods applicable for achieving continuity of reinforcements are lapping and butt welding of bars.
610  conStruction  &  erection
610.1 fabrication and inspection procedure for Steel Section
Fabrication and inspection provisions of Section 513 of IRC:24-2010 should apply for steel 
section.For propped construction care is to be taken to ensure that props do not yield otherwise 
adequate provisions has to be kept in design analysis. In the analysis prop stability has to be assured through adequate bracings and proper arrangements.
610.2 Quality c
 ontrol for reinforced concrete construction
Section 18  of IR:112-2011 should apply to material, quality control and workmanship for 
reinforced concrete portion of composite girders. clause 18.2  or IRC:112-2011 shall be 

--- PAGE 74 ---
67 IRC:22-2015
referred	to	for	specifications	 of	reinforcements	 and	clause 18.4 shall be referred for material 
ingredients of concrete which include, cement, aggregates and water. Mixed proportions of 
concrete shall be done as per clause 18.5 of IRC:112-2011.
610.3 t ransportation, Handling and e rection of Steel Section
For transportation, handling and erection of steel structure Section 514 , of IRC:24-2010 
shall be referred to.
611  teSting  metHod
Testing of materials shall be done as per standard laid down norms. For testing of concrete reference shall be made to clause 18.5.4 & 18.6 of IRC:112-2011. For testing of steel 
sections and accessories like bolts, nuts, washers, welding consumables etc. clause 513.6 of  
IRC:24-2010	 shall	be
 	referred.	For	testing	of	strength,	flexibility	and	other	relevant	properties	
of shear connectors proper test procedures as indicated in clause 611.1 shall be adopted.
611.1 t esting of Stud Shear c onnectors
The nominal static strength of a shear connector may be determined by push-out tests. The conditions and procedures which shall be followed while performing the tests are as indicated below:
 1. The dimensions of the standard test-piece are as shown in f
 ig. 19.
 2. While preparing the test-piece, the bond at the steel-concrete interface should 
be	prevented	by	greasing	the	flanges	or	by	any	other	suitable	method.
 3. The thickness of slab and detailing of reinforcement should be either as given 
in fig. 18 or as in the actual beams for which the test is designed.
 4. The rate of application of load should be uniform and such that the failure 
load is reached in not less than 10 minutes.
 5. The strength of the concrete fc, at the time of testing should not differ from the 
specified	cube	strength	 fck of the concrete by more than ± 20 percent.
 6. Not less than three tests shall be done and the nominal static strength Pu 
shall be taken as the lowest value of fck.P/fc for any of the tests, where P 
is the failure loads of the connectors at concrete strength fc and fck is the 
characteristic cube strength of the concrete.

--- PAGE 75 ---
68IRC:22-2015 
Fig. 19  Standard Push Test
 612  fire  reSiStance
Bridges	being	open 	structures	 are	not	generally	vulnerable	 to	failure	under	fire,	since	the	
temperature does not go upto the level which may cause damage to the materials. Also 
being	an	open 	structure,	 the	fire	can	be	extinguished	 easily	and	quickly.	Fire	tests	on	similar	
open structures like parking lots where composite construction has been adopted has shown that the structure does not undergo any material damage due to reasons indicated above. However,	 bridges	shall
 	be	protected	 from	possible	accidental	 fire	caused	by	hazards	like	
lighting of stoves, lamps beneath a superstructure due to possible encroachments by road-side food stalls or families living under the bridges. These can be achieved by cordoning the entire area underneath the bridges either by fencing or with proper landscaping and gardening which will further improve the aesthetics of the area.
Fire designs at specialized locations, such as proximity to oil installations or pipelines carrying 
inflammable	 materials	etc.
 	shall	be	done	based	on	recommendations	 given	in	specialized	
literatures.	 Also	adequate	provisions 	may	be	made	as	far	as	possible	for	fire	fighting	equipment	
to	access	all 	parts	of	the	bridge.	In	case	of	accidental	 occurrence	 of	fire	in	bridges	it	should	
be mandatory for the authorities to have the bridge inspected by competent experts in order to ascertain the health of the structure before it can be declared safe for re-use.
In addition to the above, locations in a bridge system which may be prone to accidental 
occurrence	 of	fire
 	as	discussed	 earlier	shall	be	adequately 	provided	with	basic	fire	protection	
methods as per specialist literature.
613  maintenance
For periodic inspection and maintenance of a bridge, procedures and guidelines primarily laid down in IRC:35 may be followed along with various other stipulations mentioned in  
IRC:24-2010 and IRC:112-2011.

--- PAGE 76 ---
69 IRC:22-2015
anneXure– I
(Clause 603.3.1; Clause 608; Clause 609)
moment of reSiStanceS
I.1 moment of resistance of composite Section with plastic or compact 
Structural Steel Section (positive moments)
I.1.1 Bending Moment with Full Shear Interaction
The design plastic moment of resistance of a section will depend on the position of the neutral 
axis. table i.1  gives the various positive and negative bending moments of a composite 
section depending upon the location of the neutral axis as shown in figs. i.1, i .2 and i.3. For 
hybrid sections appropriate yield strength shall be considered for calculation of the plastic moments.
Fig. I.1  Stress Distribution in a Composite Beam with Neutral Axis within Concrete Slab
Fig. I.2  Stress Distribution in a Composite Beam with Neutral Axis within Flange of Steel Beam

--- PAGE 77 ---
70IRC:22-2015 
Fig. I.3  Stress Distribution in a Composite Beam with Neutral Axis within  
the Web of the Steel Beam
table I.1  positive moment capacity of composite Section with full Shear interaction
case position of plastic neutral 
axisValue of xumoment capacity Mp
1 Within slab (fig. i.1 )
beff.ds>a.Asxu = a As / beffMp=As fy (dc + 0.5ds – λ. xu /2 ) / γm
2 Plastic neutral axis in steel 
flange	(fig. i.2 )
beff.ds<a.As<( beff.ds+2a.Af)
Mp = fy [As {dc+0.5ds.(1 - λ)} – 
bf.(xu – ds ).{ xu + (1 - λ).ds }]/γm
3 Plastic Neutral axis in web 
(fig. i.3 )
beff.ds + 2a.Af < a.As
Mp = fy.[ As.{dc + 0.5 ds.(1 – λ)}  
– 2Af.{0.5tf + (1 – λ/2) ds} –  
tw.(xu – ds – tf) {xu + (1 – λ) ds + tf}]/γm
   
  ... I.1 
 Af	 =	 area	of	top	flange	of	steel	beam	of	a	composite	section.
 As = cross sectional area of steel beam of a composite section.
 beff = effective width of concrete slab.
 bf	 =	 width	of	top	flange	of	steel	section.
 ds = Overall depth of concrete slab
 dc = vertical distance between centroids of concrete slabs and steel beam in  
 a composite section.
 tf	 =	 average	thickness	of	the	top	flange	of	the	steel	section.
 tw = thickness of the web of the steel section

--- PAGE 78 ---
71 IRC:22-2015
 xu	 =	 depth	 of	neutral	axis	at	ultimate	limit	state	of	flexure	from	top	of	 
 concrete
 Mp = ultimate bending moment.
 αcc = 0.67
 γc = material safety factor for concrete
  = 1.50 (for basic and seismic combinations)
 
 = 1.20 (for accidental combinations)
 γm = material safety factor for structural steel = 1.10
 η = 1.0     [for fck	≤	60	MPa]
  = 1.0 - ( fck - 60) / 250   [for 60 < fck	≤	110	MPa]
 λ = 0.8     [for fck	≤	60	MPa]
  = 0.8 - ( fck - 60) / 500  [for 60 < fck	≤	110	MPa]
I.1.2 Bending Moment with Partial Shear Interaction
Provisions for partial shear connection is applicable either for attaining economy without 
losing much in moment capacity of the composite section or in conditions where the number of shear connectors required for full shear interactions cannot be provided due to lack of space (i.e. required minimum spacing of shear connectors cannot be provided).
 Degree of shear connection S
c is given as Sc = 
 np = Number of shear connectors provided for partial shear connection
 nf = Number of shear connectors required for full shear connection
 Fcp = Capacity of shear connectors in partial shear connection with np no. of  
 connectors
 Fcf = Capacity of shear connectors in full shear connection with nf no. of  
 connectors
 M = Required bending resistance of the sectio n
 Mp = Plastic moment of resistance of the composite section
 Mps = Plastic moment of resistance of steel section alone
Therefore, to obtain required bending resistance M, the number of shear connectors required 
(assuming all connectors have equal capacity) is given as
   np = 
I.2 moment of resistance of composite Section with non-compact Structural 
Steel Section (positive moments)
Since	the	compression 	flange	of	non-compact	 steel	sections	buckle	locally	under	compression	
before reaching yield stress fy, the resistance of the composite section consisting of non-

--- PAGE 79 ---
72IRC:22-2015 
compact sections is guided by that of compact sections as above, wherein the effective width 
of	the	compression	flange	is	restricted	to	that	of	the	compact	section	limiting	value.
I.3 moment of resistance of composite Section (negative moment) (Continuous 
Girder)
fig. I.4 shows stress distribution across a composite beam section subjected to hogging 
bending	moment.	The 	steel	bottom	flange	is	in	compression.	 Section	classification	 shall	be	
done as per table 2	as	discussed 	earlier.	For	classification	of	 the	web,	the	distance	
  of the 
plastic	neutral	axis	above	the	center	of	area	of	the	steel	section,	must	first	be	found.
Fig. I.4  Stress Diagram for Hogging Moment
I.3.1 Moment of Resistance for Plastic and Compact Section
The design tensile force in reinforcement is given as,
 Fs = fyk. Ast/γs, Where, γs = partial safety factor for reinforcement = 1.15
 fyk = Characteristic yield strength of the reinforcements
 Ast = the effective area of longitudinal reinforcement within the effective width beff  
     of the beam.
 The plastic moment of resistance for p lastic and compact section is given as,
 M p = 
  ... I.2 
Where, Zp is the plastic section modulus and γm is the material safety factor to be taken as 
1.10. In the absence of any tensile reinforcements the bending resistance of the section 
would be that of the steel section as given by Mp above. To allow for reinforcements it is 
assumed that the stress in a depth 
  changes from tension to compression for Plastic and 
compact section. The corresponding depth for non-compact section is xe. For plastic and 
compact stress distribution 
  may be determined from
 
  ..t w 
 = Fs ... I.3 

--- PAGE 80 ---
73 IRC:22-2015
The locations of the neutral axis and the moment of resistance for plastic and compact section 
are given in table i .2 below:
table i.2  Limiting negative moment capacity of composite Section with  
Steel component having plastic and compact Steel
case position of plastic 
neutral axisValue of 
moment capacity Mp
1 In Web
 Mph = Mp +Fs.Z
2 In Flange
Fb = 
  = axial capacity of steel section ((As = area of steel section)
Ff	=	axial	capacity	of	a	single	flange	=	
note:	The	web	shall	classified	as	being	in	compression	throughout
As = Cross sectional area of steel beam of a composite section.
ds = Overall depth of concrete slab
de = Effective depth of slab ( fig. i.4 ).
tf	=	Average	thickness	of	the	top	flange	of	the	steel	section.
tw = Thickness of the web of the steel section
I.3.2 Moment of Resistance for Non-Compact Section
Where elastic analysis is used, creep is allowed for in the choice of modular ratio  
m (= Es / Ecm). Here, at the section considered, the loading causes hogging bending moment 
Me(s) in the steel member alone and Me(c) in the composite member.
The height xe of the elastic neutral axis of the composite section ( fig i.4) above that of the 
steel section is given as
   xe (As + Ast) = Ast 
  ... I.4 
and the second moment of area of the composite section is
   Ico = Is + As.xe2 + Ast 
   ... I.5 
Where, Is is the second moment of area of the steel section alone.
The	yield	moment 	is	mostly	governed	 by	the	total	stress	in	the	steel	bottom	flange.	The	
locations of the neutral axis and the moment of resistance for non-compact section is given 
in table i .3 below:

--- PAGE 81 ---
74IRC:22-2015 
table I.3  negative moment capacity of composite Section with  
Steel component Having plastic and compact Steel
Location of neutral axis moment capacity of 
Steel Section alone 
[ 
fs ] 
moment capacity Me(c)
note:	The	web	shall	classified	as	being	in	compression	throughout
As = Cross sectional area of steel beam of a composite section.
Ast = Cross	sectional	area	reinforcements	within	the	effective	width	of	the	concrete	flange.
ds = Overall depth of concrete slab
de = Effective depth of slab (fig. i.4 ).
Me(s) = Hogging moment in the Steel section alone.
fs = Compressive	stress	in	steel	flange	due	to	moment	 Me(s).
Is = Second moment of inertia of steel section alone
Ico = Second moment of inertia of the composite section
tf = Average	thickness	of	the	top	flange	of	the	steel	section.
tw = Thickness of the web of the steel section 
The bending moment Me(s) causes no stress in the slab reinforcements. In propped  
construction, the tensile stress in the reinforcement may govern the design. It is given as
 
  ... I.6 
i.4 flange Stress reduction factor Rh
Flange	stress	reduction	 factor	is	applicable	 for	hybrid	sections	using	higher	grade	flanges	
where the section is non-compact, or in other words, where plastic moment capacity cannot 
be generated. In such cases permissible limiting stress for both compression and tension shall	be	modified	by	the	reduction	factor	 R
h and shall be given as,
   fn = Rh . fy /γm 
For homogeneous sections, Rh shall be 1.0. The reduction factor should not be applied 
to compact or plastic sections because the effect of lower strength material in the web is accounted	 for	in
 	calculating	 the	plastic	moment	as	specified	in	clause i.1.1  The value of Rh 
may be ignored for calculating bending resistance of composite section considering the fact that, for non-homogeneous section, i.e. for fabricated girder it is always advisable to consider sections which are fully compact or plastic.

--- PAGE 82 ---
75 IRC:22-2015
i.5 Buckling resistance moment (construction Stage)
The design buckling resistance moment of a laterally unrestrained girder under un-propped 
condition during construction stage shall be taken as
 M pl (buck) = χLT.M pl  or Mel (buck) = χLT.Mel ... I.7
where,
 
  ... I.8 
Now
 
  ... I.9 
 αLt = 0.21 for rolled sections
 αLt = 0.49 for welded sections
The non-dimensional slenderness ratio, λLt, is given by
 λLt = 
  ... I.10 
where,
 βb = 1.0 for Plastic and Compact sections
  = Ze/Zp for semi-compact sections
Mcr is the elastic critical moment corresponding to lateral torsional buckling.
The elastic lateral buckling moment is given by 
 Mcr = 
  ... I.11 
The	following	simplified	conservative 	equation	may	be	used	in	the	case	of	prismatic	members	
made of standard rolled I sections and welded doubly symmetric I sections for calculating the 
elastic critical lateral buckling moment.
 Mcr = 
  = βb Zp fcr,b ... I.12 
where,
 Iw = warping constant
 Iy = moment of inertia about the weak axis
 ry = radius of gyration of the section about the weak axis]
 LLT = effective length for lateral torsional buckling
 hf	 =	 Center	to	center	distance	between	flanges
 tf,	 =	 thickness	of	the	flange
Effect	of	lateral	torsional	buckling	on	flexural	strength	need	not	be	considered	if	 λLt	≤	0.4.

--- PAGE 83 ---
76IRC:22-2015 
i.6 moment of resistance for filler Beam decks
The	stress	distribution	diagram	for	a	standard	filler	beam	decks	is	as	shown	in	 fig. I.6.
For equilibrium, Fst = Fsc + Fcc
where,
 Fst = Tensile force in the steel section below neutral axis
 Fsc = Compressive force the steel section above neutral axis
 Fcc = Compressive force in the concrete above neutral axis
Fig. I.5  Stress Diagrain for Filer Beam
The depth of the neutral axis is given as,
 xu = H - xg
where,
   xg = 
  ... I.13 
Moment of resistance,
 Mp = Fsc. Xsc + Fcc. Xcc + Fst. Xst ... I.14 
[Xsc, Xcc and Xst are respectively the distance between the neutral axis of the composite girder 
and the individual centre of gravities of the corresponding forces]
Note:
 Af	 =	 area	of	top	flange	of	steel	beam	of	a	composite	section.
 As = cross sectional area of steel beam of a composite section.
 beff = effective width of concrete slab.

--- PAGE 84 ---
77 IRC:22-2015
 bf	 =	 width	of	top	flange	of	steel	section.
 tf	 =	 average	thickness	of	the	top	flange	of	the	steel	section.
 tw = thickness of the web of the steel section
 xu	 =	 depth	of	neutral	axis	at	ultimate	limit	state	of	flexure	from	top	of	concrete
 B	 =	 Centre-to-Centre	distance	between	two	filler	beams
	 	 =	 Effective	width	of	concrete	for	one	filler	beam
 H	 =	 Distance	between	top	of	concrete	and	bottom	of	bottom	flange	of	steel	girder
 h = T otal depth of steel girder
 xg	 =	 Distance	of	neutral	axis	from	bottom	of	bottom	flange	of	steel	beam
 Mp = Ultimate bending moment.
 αcc = 0.67
 γc = Material safety factor for concrete
  = 1.50 (for basic and seismic combinations)
 
 = 1.20 (for accidental combinations)
 γm = Material safety factor for structural steel = 1.10

--- PAGE 85 ---
78IRC:22-2015 
anneXure– II
(Clause 607.8)
Location of pLaStic neutraL aX iS in compoSite coLumn
ii.1 general
Referring to fig. II.1, it is important to note that the positions of the neutral axis for points 
B and C in the interaction curve is as shown in fig. II.1, hn, can be determined from the 
difference in stresses at points B and C.
Fig. II.1  Stress Distributions for the Points of the Interaction Curve for  
Concrete Filled Rectangular Tubular Sections
The resulting axial forces, which are dependent on the position of the neutral axis of the 
cross-section, hn, can easily be determined as shown in fig. II.2. The sum of these forces 
is equal to Pc.	This	calculation	 enables	the	equation	defining	 hn to be determined, which is 
different for various types of sections.

--- PAGE 86 ---
79 IRC:22-2015
Fig. II.2  Variation in the Neutral Axis Positions
II.1.1 For Concrete Encased Steel Sections:
Major axis bending
Fig. II.3
1. Neutral axis in the web: hn	≤	[	h/2- tf ]
 hn = 
  ... II.1
2.	 Neutral	axis	in	the	flange:	[ h/2-tf	]	≤	hn	≤	h/2
 hn = 
  ... II.2 
3. Neutral axis outside the steel section: h/2 ≤ hn ≤ hc/2
 hn = 
  ... II.3 
Minor axis bending
Fig. II.4

--- PAGE 87 ---
80IRC:22-2015 
1. Neutral axis in the web: hn ≤ tw/2
 hn = 
  ... II.4
2.	 Neutral	axis	in	the	flange:	 tw/2 < hn < b/2
 hn = 
  ... II.5 
3. Neutral axis outside the steel section: b/2 ≤ hn ≤ bc/2
 hn = 
  ... II.6 
note:	 A′st is the sum of the reinforcement area within the region of 2hn
Fig. II.5
II.1.2 For Concrete Filled Tubular Sections
Major axis bending
 hn = 
  ... II.7
where,
 py = 
 , pck = 
  and pst = 
note:
	 ●	 For	circular	tubular	section	substitute	 bc = d
	 ●	 For	 minor	axis 	bending	the	same	equations	 can	be	used	by	interchanging	 h and b  
 as well as the subscripts x  and y.

--- PAGE 88 ---
81 IRC:22-2015
anneXure- III
materiaLS and  propertieS
III.1  Structural Steel
Properties of steel: The following properties shall be assumed for all grades of steel for 
design purposes:
 Young’ s Modulus (Modulus of Elasticity) = 2.0 x 105 Mpa
 Shear Modulus      = 0.77 x 105 Mpa
 Poisson’ s Ratio      = 0.30
	 Coefficient	of	 Thermal	 Evxpansion	 	 =	 0.0000	117	/	ºc	/	unit	length
requirements of Structural SteelUnless otherwise permitted herein all structural steel shall, before fabrication comply with the 
requirements of the following Indian Standards, or their latest revisions as appropriate:
IS:808 Dimensions for 
 hot rolled steel beam, column, channel and angle  
 sections
IS:1161 Steel tubes for structural purposes
IS:1239	(Pt.	1)	 Mild	 steel	tubes, 	tubular	and	other	wrought	steel	fittings:	Part-I	Mild	 
 steel tubes
IS:1239	(Pt.	2)	 Mild	 steel	tubes, 	tubular	and	other	wrought	steel	fittings:	Part-2	  
	 Mild	 steel	tubular	and	other	wrought	steel	fittings
IS:1730	 Dimensions 	for 	steel	plates,	sheets,	strips	and	flats	for	general	  
 engineering purposes
IS:1732 Dimension for round and square steel bars for structural and general  
 engineering purposes
IS:1852 Rolling and cutting tolerances for hot rolled steel products
IS:2062 Hot rolled low , medium and high tensile structural steel
IS:4923
 Hollow steel sections for structural use
IS:11587 Structural weather resistant steels
The use of structural steel not covered by the above standards may he permitted with the 
specific	approval	of	the	authority.
other Steels
Except	where	permitted	with	the	specific	approval	 of	 the	authority,	 steels	for	machined	parts	
and for uses in other than structural members or elements, shall comply with the following or 
relevant Indian Standards.
IS:1875 Carbon steel billets, blooms, slabs and bars for forgings
IS:6911 Stainless steel plate, sheet and strip

--- PAGE 89 ---
82IRC:22-2015 
castings and forgings:
Steel casting and forgings shall comply with the requirements of the following Indian Standards 
as appropriate:
IS:1030 Carbon steel castings for general engineering purposes
IS:1875 Carbon steel billets, blooms, slabs & bars for forgings
IS:2004 Carbon steel forgings for general engineering purposes
IS:2644 High tensile steel castings
IS:4367 Alloy steel forgings for general industrial use
fasteners:
Bolts, nuts, washers and rivets shall comply with the following or relevant Indian Standards, 
as appropriate:
IS:1148 Hot rolled rivet bars (upto 40 mm dia) for structural purposes
IS:1149 High tensile steel rivet bars for structural purposes
IS:1363 Hexagon head bolts, screws and nuts of product grade C (size range  
(Pt. 1 to Pt. 3) M5 to M64)
IS:1364 Hexagon head bolts, screw and nuts products grade A & B  
(Pt. 1 to Pt. 3) (size range M1.6 to M64).
IS:1367 Technical supply conditions for threaded steel fasteners  
(Pt. 1 to Pt. 18)
IS:1929 Hot forged steel rivets for hot closing (12 to 36 mm diameter)
IS:2155 Cold forged solid steel rivets for hot closing (6 to 16 mm diameter)
IS:3640	 Hexagon	 fit	bolts
IS:3757 High strength structural bolts
IS:4000 High strength bolts in steel structures-code of practice
IS:5369 General requirements for plain washers and lock washers
IS:5370 Plain washers with outside dia = 3 x inside dia.
IS:5372 Taper washers for channels (ISMC)
IS:5374
 Taper washer for I-beams (1SMB)
IS:5624 Foundation bolts
IS:6610 Heavy washers for steel structures
IS:6623 High strength structural nuts
IS:6649 Hardened and tempered washers for high strength structural bolts  
 and nuts
IS:7002 Prevailing torque type steel hexagon nuts
Welding consumables:
Welding consumables shall comply with the following Indian standards, as appropriate:
IS:814 Covered electrodes for manual metal arc welding of carbon and  
 carbon manganese steel

--- PAGE 90 ---
83 IRC:22-2015
IS:1395 Low and medium alloy, steel covered electrodes for manual metal  
 arc welding
IS:3613	 Acceptance 	tests 	for	wire	flux	combination	 for	submerged	 arc	 
 welding
IS:6419 Welding rods und bare electrodes for gas shielded arc welding of  
 structural steel
IS:6560 Molybdenum and chromium- molybdenum low alloy steel welding  
 rods and bare electrodes for gas shielded arc welding
IS:7280 Bare wire electrodes for submerged arc welding of structural steel
Welding:
IS:812 Glossary of terms relating to welding and cutting of metal
IS:816 Code of practice for use of metal arc welding for general construction  
 in mild steel
IS:822 Code of procedure for inspection of welds
IS:1024 Code of practice for use of welding in bridges and structures subject  
 to dynamic loading
IS:1182 Recommended practice for radiographic examination of fusion  
 welded butt joints in steel plates
IS:4853 Recommended practice for radiographic inspection of fusion welded  
 butt joints in steel pipes
IS:5334	 Code	of 	practice	for	magnetic	 particle	flaw	detection	 of	welds 
IS:7307 (Pt.1) Approval tests for welding procedures: Part-I fusion welding of steel
IS:7310 (Pt.1) Approval tests for welders working to approved welding procedures:  
 Part-1 fusion welding of steel
IS:7318 (Pt.1) Approval tests for welders when welding procedure is not required:  
 Part- 1 fusion welding of steel
IS:9595 Recommendations for metal arc welding of carbon and carbon  
 manganese steels
Wire ropes and cables:
These shall conform to the following or relevant Indian Standards except where use of other 
types	is	specifically	permitted	by	the	authority.
IS:1785	(Pt.1)	 Specification	 for	plain 	hard-drawn	 steel	wire	for	pre-stressed	  
 concrete: Part-1; Cold drawn stress relieved wire
IS:1785	(Pt.2)	 Specification	 for	plain 	hard-drawn	 steel	wire	for	pre-stressed	  
 concrete: Part-2; As- drawn wire
IS:2266
 Steel wire ropes for general engineering purposes
IS:2315 Thimbles for wire ropes
IS:9282 Wire ropes and strands for suspension bridges

--- PAGE 91 ---
84IRC:22-2015 
III.2 concrete
All structural concrete shall be of minimum grade M25 and shall be cast in accordance with 
stipulations	 mentioned 	in 	IRC:112-2011.	 The	strengths	 shall	be	specified	 in	terms	of	the	
characteristic cube strengths, fck , measured at 28 days. Stress and deformation characteristics 
of various grades of concrete shall also be in accordance with IRC:112-2011. table III.1 
gives the properties of different grades of concrete.

--- PAGE 92 ---
85 IRC:22-2015Table - III - 1: Properties of Concrete
Strength class of concrete
Strength class m 15 m 20 m 25 m 30 m 35 m 40 m 45 m 50 m 55 m 60 m 65 m 70 m 75 m 80 m 85 m 90
(fck)cu (MPa) 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90
(fck)cy (MPa) 12 16 20 24 28 32 36 40 44 48 52 56 60 64 68 72
fctm (MPa) 1.6 1.9 2.2 2.5 2.8 3.0 3.3 3.5 3.7 4.0 4.4 4.5 4.7 4.8 4.9 5.0
Ecm (GPa) 27 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 38 39 40 40 41
note:-
(fck) cu ---- characteristic compressive (cube) strength of concrete
(fck) cy ---- characteristic compressive (cylinder) strength of concrete, given by 0.8 times 28 days cube crushing strength of concrete
fctm ---- mean tensile strength of concrete
Ecm ---- Secant Modulus of elasticity of concrete.
The values of Ecm given above are for quartzite/granite aggregates. They should be  multiplied by the following factors as given below:
Limestone = 0.9; Sandstone = 0.7; Basalt = 1.2
the values have been taken from t able - 6.5 of irc :112-2011

--- PAGE 93 ---
86IRC:22-2015 
III.3 reinforcement Steel for concrete
Reinforcing Steel grades used in the concrete construction should conform to IS:1786-2008. 
It	should	be 	noted	that	the	ductility	of	reinforcing	 bars	will	have	a	significant	 effect	on	the	
behavior	of	continuous 	composite	 beam	where	the	reinforcements	 provide	sufficient	tensile	
resistance at top of the section.
__________
